UC San Diego
Scripps Institution of Oceanography Technical Report
Title
The Science of Surfing Waves and Surfing Breaks - A Review
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6h72j1fz
Authors
Scarfe, B. E.
Elwany, M. H.S.
Mead, S. T.
et al.
Publication Date
2003-03-07
eScholarship.org Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 1 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
7 March 2003 
The Science of Surfing Waves and Surfing Breaks - A Review 
 
B. E. Scarfe†, M. H. S. Elwany‡, S. T. Mead† and K. P. Black†
†ASR Ltd. 
PO Box 13048 
Hamilton, New Zealand 
b.scarfe@asrltd.co.nz 
s.mead@asrltd.co.nz 
k.black@asrltd.co.nz 
 
‡Coastal Environments 
2166 Avenida De La Playa 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA 
hany@coastalenvironments.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
Surfing breaks have great social and economic value for coastal communities. In order to preserve and enhance these resources, 
a common language is needed that will bri dge the gap between the colloquial slang of surfers and the technical language of 
scientists and policy makers. This language is the science of surfing waves and surfing breaks, and the more it is developed an d 
used, the easier relations will be between th e interested parties. This paper will creat e the basis for such a language to be u sed in 
future studies of surfing waves and surfing breaks. 
Surfing waves and surfing breaks are currently understood well enough to predict the effects of coastal modifications on surfing 
locations and to design artificial surfing reefs. However, the use of this knowledge for more practical applications has been limited. 
This paper consolidates the literature on the science of surfing waves and surfing breaks in an effort to communicate the basic s of 
this science to coastal planners, engineers and policy makers. Fi rst, the types of surfing waves that are preferred by surfers are 
discussed, including a description of the main surfing wave parame ters. Second, it is shown that the wave type determines the 
surfing skill level required and types of maneuvers that can be performed. Third, the seabed features that cause waves to trans form 
well for surfing are presented. 
ADDITIONAL KEY WORDS: Surfing break components, surfing reef components, peel angle, breaking intensity, wave 
sections, section length, surfing maneuvers, surfer’s skill level. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Every year more and more people decide to take up surfing 
as a leisure activity. The enormous social and economic 
benefits of having a quality surfing break in a coastal 
community are only now being fully realized by planners and 
policy makers. Increasingly, the preservation and enhancement 
of surfing breaks is being practiced because of its value to the 
community (e.g., BLACK, 2001a and 2001b; BLACK and 
MEAD, 2001; BLACK et al ., 1998, 1999, 2000 and 2001; 
BORRERO, 2002; COURIEL, 1996; MEAD, 2001; MEAD 
and BLACK, 1999a and 2002; MEAD et al ., 1998 and 2001; 
MOFFATT & NICHOL ENGINEERS, 1989; 
PATTIARATCHI, 1999a and 2000). 
Surfers are traditionally defensive about any activity in the 
vicinity of their favorite surfing breaks. This behavior may be 
justified because history shows th at their rights have at times 
been ignored and many surfing breaks have been destroyed by 
coastal modification. When enhancements have been made, 
they have been unintentional rath er than an orig inal objective. 
Now, with the emergence of more progressive attitudes by 
councils and coastal engineers toward surfers, there is a need 
for a common language between the parties. This language 
needs to bridge the gap between the colloquial slang of surfers 
and the technical language of scientists and policy makers. 
Development of such a common language will help in the 
preservation of surfing breaks and construction of artificial 
surfing reefs. This language is the science of surfing waves 
and surfing breaks. The more it is developed and used, the 
easier relations will be between the interested parties. This 
paper creates the basis for such a language to be used in future 
studies of surfing waves and surfing breaks. It compiles and 
summarizes the literature on the science of surfing waves and 
surfing breaks from numerous journal and conference papers, 
theses, dissertations and technical reports. A concise 
background is provided on surfing waves and surfing breaks 
with references to more detailed information. First, the types 
of waves that surfers prefer are discussed, including a 
description of the main surfing wave parameters. Second, it is 
shown that wave type determines required surfing skill level 
and maneuver types that can be performed. Third, the seabed 
features that cause waves to transform well for surfing are 
presented. Finally, the way the configuration of these features 
creates good surfing waves is discussed. 
THE HISTORY OF SURFING WAVE AND 
SURFING BREAK RESEARCH 
The study of the physical processes behind surfing waves 
and surfing breaks has come a long way since the initial 
investigations of Hawaiian surf breaks in the early 1970s 
(WALKER and PALMER , 1971; WALKER et al. , 1972; 
WALKER, 1974a and 1974b). Significant advances began in 
the 1990s with the development of the Artificial Reefs 
Program at Waikato University in New Zealand (ANDREWS, 
1997; HUTT, 1997; MEAD, 2001; MOORES, 2001; SAYCE, 
1997; SCARFE, 2002) and the Cable Stations Artificial Reef 
Surfing Science Review 2 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 2 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
Project at the University of Western Australia 
(PATTIARATCHI, 1997, 1999 and 2000; PATTIARATCHI et 
al., 1999; BANCROFT, 1999). The First Artificial Surfing 
Reefs Symposium in Sydney, Australia (1997), and the Second 
in San Diego, California (1998) further spurred interest. They 
brought together surfing enthusiasts from a wide range of 
disciplines and localities. Mo re recently, the Second Surfing 
Art, Science, and Issues Conference (SASIC2) put on by the 
Groundswell Society in Ventura, California (2002) encouraged 
discussion. 
A summary of surfing science and artificial surfing reef 
construction knowledge was presented in Journal of Coastal 
Research, Special Issue No. 29. Subsequently various areas of 
surfing research have defined themselves. They are as follows: 
• The effects of submerged reefs on sediment transport 
and salient formation (ANDREWS, 1997; BLACK 
and ANDREWS, 2001a and 2001b; BLACK and 
MEAD, 2001); 
• The relationship of surfers to surfing waves (DALLY, 
1990, 2001a and 2001b; HUTT, 1997; HUTT et al., 
2001; MOORES, 2001; SCARFE, 1999, 2002; 
SCARFE et al., 2002); 
• The bathymetric shape of surfing breaks 
(ACHENBACH, 1998; MEAD, 2001; MEAD and 
BLACK, 1999b, 2001a and 2001b; RAICHLE, 1998; 
SCARFE, 1999 and 2002; SCARFE et al. 2003a, 
2003b and in press; WEST et al., 2002); 
• The prediction of wave-driven currents (SYMONDS 
and BLACK, 2001); 
• The prediction of breaker intensity of surfing waves 
(SAYCE, 1997; SAYCE et al., 1999; MEAD and 
BLACK, 2001c); and 
• The prediction of beach surfability (DALLY, 1989; 
PATTIARATCHI et al., 1999; SCARFE, 2002). 
 
The study of surfing waves and surfing breaks can be 
thought of as two separate but related subjects. The study of 
surfing waves investigates the different characteristics of 
waves and how they relate to surfing rides and surfers. The 
study of surfing breaks examines how seafloor bathymetry 
transforms ordinary waves into surfing waves. Figure 1 
diagrammatically shows how surfing break bathymetry 
transforms ordinary waves into surfable waves. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFING WAVES 
Surfers desire waves where the break point “peels” along 
the wave crest. They surf just ahead of the advancing wave 
crest within the “wave pocket” where most of the wave’s 
power is located. Unless they are beginners, surfers are not 
satisfied with riding waves that do not peel. If the wave peels 
to the right from the surfer’s pe rspective (to the left when 
looking from the beach), the wave is said to be a “righthand” 
wave, or a “righthander.” If the wave peels to the left from the 
surfer’s perspective (to the right when looking from the 
beach), the wave is said to be a “lefthand” wave, or a 
“lefthander.” 
 
Figure 1. Ordinary waves are transformed by surfing break 
bathymetry into surfing waves, which create surfing rides. 
Together, the speed at which the wave peels and the breaker 
type determine the skill level required to surf a wave (HUTT, 
1997; HUTT et al., 2001, MOORES, 2001) as well as the 
types of maneuvers that can be performed (SCARFE, 2002; 
SCARFE et al., 2002). Not all waves are suitable for surfing, 
and among those that are, not all can be surfed by surfers at all 
levels. The character of surfing waves varies not only from 
location to location, but also from day to day with tide level 
and swell. In fact, even su ccessive waves can break with 
considerably different characteristics. 
There are various different types of surfing (Figure 2), 
which include short boarding, long boarding, body boarding, 
and body surfing. Surfboards for short boarding are generally 
between six and seven feet long, and the surfing style is 
aggressive. Surfers who ride s hort boards, or short boarders, 
perform fast and powerful su rfing maneuvers. Surfboards for 
long boarding range from seven to eleven feet long. Long 
boards are also called Malibu’s (or Mal’s), because they suit 
the slow and gentle waves found at places like Malibu, 
California. Riding long boards, or long boarding, is a much 
slower and more relaxed styl e of surfing, because waves 
suitable for long boarding break more slowly and softly than 
those for short boarding. Shorter Mal’s are called mini-Mal’s 
and cross over between the two styles of standup surfing. 
Surfing Science Review 3 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 3 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
 
Figure 2. Types of surfing from top to bottom – Short board 
surfer (www.aspworldtour .com), long board surfer 
(www.kahunavideo.com), prone body boarder 
(www.bodyboarderweb.com), body surfer 
(www.worldbodysurfing.com) and drop knee body boarder 
(www.bodyboarderweb.com). 
Body boarding, also called boogie boarding, uses a small 
foam board rather than a fiberglass board. The board is about 
three feet long, and the surfer generally does not stand up on it. 
When riding a body board lying down, the style is called 
“prone.” There is a style of body boarding where the body 
boarder almost stands that is called “drop knee.” Fins or 
flippers are used to catch wave s rather than paddling as in 
standup surfing. The combination of fins and a small board 
makes it difficult to stand up. When riding “drop knee,” the 
surfer kneels on one knee and stands on the other. Body surfers 
do not use a board at all; they surf the wave using their body as 
a board. Fins are often used to help the swimmer catch the 
wave. 
Although there are four main types of surfing, most of the 
scientific surfing research has focused on short boarding. 
Therefore, this review also focuses on short boarding waves, 
but the concepts are applicable to all types of surfing waves 
and can be extrapolated to ot her surfing styles. For example, 
long boarders desire waves with higher peel angles and lower 
breaking intensities than short boarders. Body boarders desire 
waves with more extreme breaker intensities. 
Surfing Wave Parameters 
The four most important wave parameters for analysis of 
surfing waves are breaking wave height (H B), wave peel angle 
(α), wave breaking intensity (BI), and wave section length (S L) 
(SCARFE et al. 2002 and 2003a). Other surfing wave 
parameters exist (see DALLY, 1990, 2001a and 2001b; 
MEAD, 2001; MOORES, 2001; SAYCE, 1997; SAYCE et al., 
1999; SCARFE, 2002; WALKER, 1974), but they are only 
derivatives of these four main variables. Any surfing wave can 
be described using only these four variables. SCARFE et al. 
(2002 and 2003a) recommend the sole use of these four to 
maintain consistency within the scientific surfing literature. 
Wave Height (Hb) 
Surfing wave height is often considered the most important 
variable at a surfing break (RAICHLE, 1998). Oceanographers 
measure wave height from the crest to the trough of the wave. 
Groups of surfers develop thei r own definitions of wave 
heights, which can be slightly larger or smaller than the 
distance from crest to trough. In the scientific study of surfing 
waves, the oceanographic method of measuring from crest to 
trough is used. Waves come in sets, and surfers ride the largest 
waves in a set. HUTT (1997) recommends the use of an 
average of the top 10 % of waves (H1/10) when measuring wave 
statistics for surfing rather than significant wave height (H1/3). 
Wave Peel Angle (α) 
Peel angle is defined as the angle between the trail of the 
broken whitewater and the crest of the unbroken wave as it 
propagates shoreward (Figure 3; WALKER, 1974; HUTT, 
1997; HUTT, et al. , 2001; MEAD, 2001b; SCARFE, 2002). 
Peel angles range between 0° and 90°, with low angles 
creating fast surfing waves and high angles creating slow 
Surfing Science Review 4 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 4 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
waves. An angle of 0° is desc ribed as a closeout (MEAD and 
BLACK, 2001b). 
 
Figure 3. The peel angle, α, is defined as the angle between the 
trail of the broken white water and the crest of the unbroken 
part of the wave as it propagates shoreward (from Mead, 
2001). 
The wave peel rate describes how fast the wave breakpoint 
advances laterally along the wave crest. Surfers must surf at 
least as fast as the wave peel rate in order to stay in front of the 
wave break point. Peel angle is closely related to wave peel 
rate because they both relate to how fast a wave is breaking. 
Although theoretical models designed to relate peel angle with 
peel rate have been developed (DALLY, 1990 and 2001a), 
SCARFE (2002) and SCARFE et al. (2002) recommend using 
peel angle because it can be more accurately numerically 
modeled and is more sensitive to maneuver type. Using 
complex field experiments, SCARFE (2002) measured peel 
angles and peel rates for different maneuver types. Peel angle 
was found to control maneuver type, while no relationship 
could be found with peel rate. DALLY (2001b) and MOORES 
(2001) have both looked at maximum surfer speeds that give 
approximations of the maximum surfable peel rate. 
Wave Breaking Intensity (BI) 
Orthogonal seabed gradient is the dominant variable 
controlling wave breaker intensity (MEAD and BLACK, 
2001c). Waves will break either as spilling, plunging, surging, 
or collapsing breakers, depending on the orthogonal seabed 
gradient. Waves break on a continuum between these main 
types of breakers (KOMAR, 1998). Surfers generally prefer 
waves with steep or plungi ng faces (MEAD and BLACK, 
2001c). These waves provide greater power to propel surfers 
and the opportunity for more advanced surfers to experience 
barrel rides. Traditional methods of describing wave type, such 
as the Irribarren number, the surf scaling parameter, or the surf 
similarity parameter have not been found to be appropriate for 
surfing rides (MEAD and BLACK, 2001c; SAYCE, 1997; 
SAYCE et al., 1999). These methods are used to describe all 
forms of wave breaking from spilling to collapsing and are too 
general for surfing waves (MEAD and BLACK, 2001c). 
The types of plunging waves that surfers ride vary greatly. 
MEAD and BLACK (2001c) investigated the shapes of 
plunging waves at 28 “world-class” surfing breaks. The term 
“world-class” has been used in literature to describe surfing 
breaks that are representative of the best surfing locations in 
the world. A cubic curve was fitted to the barrel shape, also 
termed the wave vortex. The ratio between the height and 
width of the vortex is called the vortex ratio and is a good 
indicator of breaker intensity (MEAD and BLACK, 2001c). A 
linear relationship was seen when the vortex ratio was plotted 
against the orthogonal seabed gr adient for each surfing site. 
Regression analysis by MEAD and BLACK (2001c) showed 
that Equation 1 can be used to quantify the wave breaker 
intensity (R² = 0.71), where X is the orthogonal seabed 
gradient and Y is the breaker intensity. 
Y = 0.065 X + 0.821 (1) 
MEAD and BLACK (2001c) note that Equation 1 is the 
first attempt at quantifying the breaker intensity of plunging 
surfing waves and is simplistic. They suggest that the method 
might be improved by incorpora ting wave height and period. 
In reality orthogonal seabed pr ofiles are made up of varying 
gradients, with the deeper water gradient generally lower than 
the shallow water gradient. The shallower water gradient has 
more of an effect than the d eepwater gradient. The effect of 
steps in the profile, or multiple gradient profiles, on breaker 
intensity is still relatively unknown. However, MEAD and 
BLACK’s (2001c) simple relationship can still be used to 
quantify the design characteristics of artificial surfing reefs and 
to differentiate between breaker intensity at surfing breaks. 
Breaker intensity has been cl assified by MEAD and BLACK 
(2001c) as medium, medium/high, high, very high, and 
extreme. Each classification was defined by the breaking 
intensity range based on Equation 1. 
Wind strength and direction affect breaking intensity. 
Offshore winds increase breaking intensity, and onshore or 
cross-shore winds lower it. The perfect wind conditions for 
surfing are light offshore. These wind conditions delay wave 
breaking, causing the wave to break in shallower water and 
increasing the breaker intensity. Strong offshore winds make 
waves hard to catch. 
Wave Section Length (SL) 
It is rare to find surfing waves peeling with a regular and 
consistent character. Peaks in wave crests from unorganized 
swells and wave focusing as well as from undulating 
bathymetry cause waves to break in sections. Waves breaking 
in sections create interesting and challenging surfing rides 
because surfers can perform different maneuvers on the 
various sections. However, the section must not be so long or 
fast that the surfer is trapped behind the wave pocket. A new 
section begins when there is a change in wave height (Hb), peel 
angle ( α), or breaking intensity (B I), and is said to have a 
section length of S L. Wave sections have been investigated by 
MOORES (2001), SCARFE, 2002 and SCARFE et al. (2002). 
Surfing Science Review 5 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 5 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
Relating Surfing Waves To Surfers 
Studies have related surfers to surfing waves in order to 
determine design criteria for artificial surfing reefs. This 
research falls into two categories. The first relates a surfer’s 
skill level to surfing wave parameters. The second relates 
surfing maneuvers to surfing wave parameters. 
Surfer Skill Level 
Different surfing waves suit diffe rent types of surfers, and 
surfers prefer to ride waves that match or challenge their 
abilities. The range of wave heights, peel angles, breaking 
intensities, and section lengths that a surfer can successfully 
negotiate depends on skill leve l. WALKER (1974) developed 
a classification scheme to describe the surfable limits of 
beginner, intermediate, and expert surfers based on peel angles 
and wave height. Subsequently, the scheme was revalidated for 
modern surfing standards by HUTT et al. (2001). The 
delineations between the surfer skill level categories were 
made with a more quantitative 1-to-10 ranking system by 
HUTT et al. (2001). 
The higher the surfing skill level, the greater the ability to 
negotiate difficult sections and link sections together for long 
surfing rides. MOORES (2001) looked at how skill level 
related to a surfer’s ability to surf through wave sections with 
decreases in peel angles. His general findings were: 
• The higher the skill level, the longer the sections that 
can be made. 
• Surfers with high skill levels do not require as much 
speed coming into a section because they have more 
ability to generate speed. 
• Surfers with a skill level of 3 or less (beginner) cannot 
make sections. 
MOORES (2001) used his findings to develop maximum 
section length, duration, and speed values for artificial surfing 
reef design. The relationship between surfer skill and breaking 
intensity has not yet been quantified. 
Surfing Maneuvers 
Surfing is a recreational activity and performing maneuvers 
is the goal of most surfers. The types of maneuvers a surfer 
performs are dependent on ability, style of surfing, and wave 
type. For any given wave type, most surfers will perform 
similar types of maneuvers (SCARFE, 2002; SCARFE et al., 
2002). The first investigations into surfing maneuvers were 
undertaken by SCARFE (2002) and SCARFE et al. (2002). 
Definitions of each maneuver can be found in SCARFE (2002) 
and SCARFE et al. (2002 and 2003b). 
SCARFE (2002) found three types of maneuvers: 
functional, expressive, and tran sitional (Figure 4). Functional 
maneuvers are required for anyone to surf. A functional 
maneuver such as speed weaving is required simply to keep up 
with a breaking wave. It performs the function of staying in the 
powerful section of the wave. A more expressive maneuver 
such as an aerial is performed solely to fulfill the surfer’s need 
to perform a difficult feat. Maneuvers such as top turns and 
bottom turns can be considered as transitional moves that are 
used to link together functiona l maneuvers with expressive 
maneuvers. Each maneuver can be categorized as functional, 
transitional, or expressive, depending on when it is being done. 
A bottom turn may be functional when dropping into a wave, 
transitional when preparing for an aerial, or expressive when 
executed under certain conditions. 
 
Figure 4. Relationship between the percentage of each surfing 
maneuver type and skill level (from Scarfe, 2002). 
The category of a maneuver also changes depending on the 
surfer’s skill level. Surfers with low skill levels perform more 
functional maneuvers, while those at higher skill levels 
perform more expressive ma neuvers. A basic, functional 
maneuver to an expert surfer will be an expressive maneuver 
to a beginner. The ability of surfers of different abilities to 
perform each maneuver type is tabulated in SCARFE (2002). 
Analysis of peel angles during certain maneuvers by 
SCARFE (2002) and presented in SCARFE et al. (2002) 
yielded design criteria to incorporate maneuver type into wave 
sections of artificial surfing reefs (Figure 5). These maneuvers 
represent the division in peel angles where a maneuver can be 
performed. For example, although the word cutback is used 
here, in the analysis it is just as likely that a surfer will perform 
a roundhouse for the given wave scenario. When surfing 
through a speed section, a surfer can speed weave, perform a 
floater or foam bounce, or experience a barrel ride if the 
breaker intensity is high enough. 
 
Figure 5. Range of peel angles that are suitable for different 
surfing maneuvers (from Scarfe, 2002; Scarfe et al., 2002). 
Maneuver type is also related to breaking intensity. For a 
given peel angle, a surfer may perform a top turn on a wave 
with a medium breaking intensity, a reo or vertical re-entry if 
the breaking is higher, or a barrel if the breaking intensity is 
extreme. SCARFE (2002) investigated how breaking intensity 
Surfing Science Review 6 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 6 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
from orthogonal seabed gradients relates to maneuvers; 
however, findings were inconclusive. The measurement of 
breaking intensity on a section-by-section scale is difficult, and 
it would have been preferable to use more descriptive 
terminology. 
Configuration of Wave Sections 
Variation in any of the four surfing wave parameters creates 
a new section. Different maneuvers can be performed 
depending on the configuration of wave sections. Figure 6 
illustrates how section length, peel angle, and breaker intensity 
can affect maneuver type. Surfers are likely to perform the 
maneuvers shown in Figure 6 for the corresponding wave 
sections. Incorporating interes ting and varying sections into 
artificial surfing reefs will challenge surfers and keep rides 
interesting. Maneuver type for a section is also dependent on 
the previous section (SCARFE et al. , 2002). For example, a 
surfer riding a section with a low peel angle will be traveling 
fast to keep up with the wave break point. If the next section 
dramatically increases in peel angle, then the surfer will 
perform a move such as a cutback to lose speed and stay in the 
powerful pocket of the wave. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFING BREAKS 
Planar beaches with parallel contours do not produce good 
surfing breaks (SCARFE et al., 2003b). The peel angle is too 
low for surfing. Waves simply “closeout” as the wave crest 
breaks all at once rather than peeling. More interesting 
bathymetric features are needed to cause waves to break along 
the wave crest rather than all at once. All good surfing breaks 
have preconditioning components and/or shallow water 
features that cause waves to peel. This is why most surfing 
spots are near prominent morphological features, such as river 
mouths with ebb deltas, coral/rock reefs, points, rock ledges, 
piers, jetties, or beaches where large scale bar/rip features are 
created by edge waves. 
The majority of waves that break on shorelines are not 
suitable for surfing. In order for waves to break well for 
surfing, wave height, peel angle and breaking intensity must be 
within the surfable range (HUTT et al. , 2001; MOORES, 
2001; SCARFE 2001; SCARFE et al., 2002). Top surfers can 
ride waves ranging from a very low to an extremely high, 
dangerous breaker intensity within a range of wave heights 
from 1-50 feet. In fact, it is becoming apparent that top surfers 
are now able to surf waves of almost any size and any breaking 
intensity. The major surfing wave parameter that differentiates 
a surfable from a non-surfable wave is peel angle. Therefore, 
the role of a surfing break is to increase peel angle to within 
surfable limits. Although peel angles can be too high to 
challenge more advanced surfers, high peel angles do not 
necessarily prevent surfers fro m riding waves, whereas low 
peel angles do. 
Surfing Reef/Break Components 
MEAD and BLACK (2001a) identified the major 
bathymetric features that cause surfing breaks to form good 
surfing waves. Surfing reef or surfing break components were 
classified based on surveys and numerical modeling of world-
class surfing breaks in New Zealand, Australia, Indonesia, 
Hawaii, California and Brazil. Each component was 
distinguished by its shape and function. MEAD and BLACK 
(2001a) refer to these features as surfing reef components, but 
this term also includes surfing break features made of material 
other than reef. The identified components are ramp, platform, 
wedge, focus, ledge, ridge and pinnacle. Schematic diagrams 
of each component are shown in Figure 7. 
Depending on the configuration, orientation and size of 
these components, MEAD and BLACK (1999b and 2001b) 
found that different wave types are produced. Any alteration of 
these components by natural processes or human actions will 
change the surfing wave parameters at the surfing break. 
The “favored orthogonal direction” is the wave alignment 
that produces the best quality surfing waves over a reef 
component (MEAD and BLACK, 2001a). Any deviation from 
the optimum alignment will cause an increase or decrease in 
ideal peel angle. This leads to waves breaking more quickly or 
slowly than desired for high-performance surfing. 
Definition of Components 
MEAD and BLACK’s (2001a) definitions of functional reef 
components are as follows: 
Ramp 
A ramp causes waves to refract and organize themselves. 
The directional spread of offshore waves is aligned 
orthogonally to ramp contours prior to breaking on another 
morphological component. Good quality surfing waves do not 
break on a ramp. 
Focus 
A focus is a seabed ridge that causes a peak in wave height 
and lowers the effective seabed gradient, making it easier for a 
surfer to take off. Focuses can also occur at any section of a 
surfing ride. Depending on water depth relative to swell and 
extent of focusing, peaks will cause wave breaking or increase 
the wave height of an advancing wave prior to its breaking 
over another reef component. 
Platform 
A platform is a flat, horizontal plane, and therefore has little 
effect on advancing waves. Platforms join different 
components without altering wave orientation or causing 
excessive shoaling. A platform’s two main functions are to 
maintain wave orthogonals established by a ramp or focus and 
to allow sufficient depth of water for waves to break above a 
ledge. In the first situation, an optimal platform is just deeper 
than the depth where waves will break at a particular site. 
Wedge 
A wedge is a planar component, tilted downward in the 
offshore direction, similar to a ra mp. It differs because it is at 
an angle to the favored orthogonal direction and in shallow 
enough water to cause wave breaking. This is the main wave-
breaking component of most surf breaks. The orientation of the 
wedge determines the amount of refraction and therefore the 
wave peel angle. 
Surfing Science Review 7 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 7 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
 
Figure 6. Configuration of wave sections suitable for different types of maneuvers. Adapted from Scarfe et al. (2002).
Surfing Science Review 8 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 8 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
Ledge 
A ledge is a very steep wedge with a platform extending 
shoreward from its top edge. Little or no refraction can occur, 
and therefore the orientation of the ledge is critical. A ledge 
must have a gradient >1:4, or waves are likely to surge and 
collapse. Plunging waves are common on ledges. 
Ridge 
A ridge is similar in shape to a focus, but oriented so that it 
does not cause wave convergence. The ridge provides a section 
of steeper seabed gradient, cau sing a decrease in peel angle 
and increase in breaker intensity. Ridges do not refract waves 
significantly compared with we dges. A focus can become a 
ridge when the wave angle changes significantly and water 
depth is low enough to cause wave breaking. 
Pinnacle 
A pinnacle increases breaker inte nsity in a way similar to a 
ridge, except it is more abrupt and affects a smaller area. 
Pinnacles as well as focuses often define the takeoff zone and 
help surfers to catch waves. 
MEAD and BLACK (2001a) subcategorized components 
by their functions. Ramps, focuses, and platforms precondition 
the wave prior to breaking by aligning and shoaling. Wedges, 
ledges, ridges and pinnacles cause the wave to break. The 
breaking components are often small-scale features that are 
nestled on larger, preconditioning components. 
 
Figure 7. Reef components that make up the bathymetry of world-class surfing breaks (from Mead and Black, 2001a). The large 
arrows represent the “favored orthogonal direction,” and the sm all arrows represent transformations to the wave orthogonals. 
Note that the platform has not been included here because it is essentially a flat component that does not refract waves that p ass 
over it. 
 
Configuration of Components 
Different types of waves can be produced depending on the 
configuration of reef components. The components combine 
holistically to produce quality surfing waves, and depending 
on size, orientation, and confi guration, produce different wave 
types (MEAD and BLACK, 1999b). Analysis of the reef 
component configuration by MEAD and BLACK (2001b) 
showed four common setups of surfing breaks. They are: 
• Ramp/Wedge 
• Ramp/Platform/Wedge 
• Ramp/Focus/Wedge 
• Ramp/Ledge/Platform 
Surfing Science Review 9 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 9 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
In a case study of Bingin Reef, Bali, Indonesia by MEAD 
and BLACK (1999b), the role of different reef components 
was investigated using numerical modeling. Bingin was found 
to produce consistent and surfable peel angles over a range of 
wave heights because of the configuration of five main 
components (Figure 8). Bingin is a Ramp/Focus/Wedge 
configuration with a ridge superimposed on the wedge and a 
platform abutting the wedge. 
Most surfing breaks do not produce perfect surfing waves 
throughout the entire tide cycle, especially when tidal ranges 
are large. As the water depth changes, the components that 
comprise the break also change, e ither in function or in impact 
on wave propagation. SCARFE (2002) showed that the 3.5-4.0 
m tide range at Manu Bay, Raglan, New Zealand can behave 
as two different surfing break s depending on the tide because 
the component configuration changes. 
Scale of Components 
The seven components identified by MEAD and BLACK 
(2001a) occur at macro, meso and micro-scales (SCARFE, 
2002). At the largest scale, offshore components refract and 
organize waves before they break. For example, a ramp can 
align waves along the whole coast or be a smaller component 
of a surfing break, aligning a section of the wave prior to its 
breaking on another component (MEAD and BLACK, 2001a). 
Macro-scale components influence wave direction and 
shoaling but do not cause waves to break. Meso-scale 
components focus and orient waves prior to breaking and can 
cause wave breaking. Micro-scale components are 
superimposed on meso-scale features and create wave sections 
between 5 and 40 m (SCARFE, 2002). 
 
 
Figure 8. Ramp/Focus/Wedge configuration of reef components at Bingin Reef, Bali, Indonesia (from Mead and Black, 2001b). 
From left to right – measured bathymetry, numerical model output of refraction over the surfing reef, idealized schematic of th e 
component configuration. The configuration of the components was manipulated by Mead and Black (1999b) to see the role each 
component played in the creation of the world-class surfing waves at Bingin Reef. 
 
Example of Scale - Manu Bay Surfing Reef, Raglan, 
New Zealand 
The surfing reefs at Raglan are part of a large boulder 
headland with a gently sloping sandy continental shelf starting 
about 6 m below mean low water (see HUTT, 1997; HUTT et 
al., 2001; MEAD, 2001; MOORES, 2001; SAYCE, 1997; 
SCARFE, 2002). At a macro-scale, the continental shelf acts 
as a wedge, organizing and refracting swell toward the favored 
orthogonal direction for each su rfing spot. Often even very 
messy swells produce clean surfi ng waves at Raglan because 
of the headland effect (MEAD and BLACK, 2001b). This 
effect occurs where shorter period local swells are filtered out 
as waves refract on the wedge of the headland, resulting in 
clean, organized, long-period waves at surfing breaks relative 
to the offshore wave spectrum. 
The reef meso-scale components of Manu Bay and The 
Ledge are defined by MEAD and BLACK (2001b) as a 
wedge/ridge configuration. The Ledge is a section of Manu 
Bay that only breaks under certain conditions. It is the heaviest 
and most spectacular of all th e Raglan surfing breaks because 
of the hollow barrels that can be surfed. A ridge feature creates 
The Ledge by increasing breaker intensity and lowering peel 
angle for the section. 
Micro-scale reef components (Figure 9) were identified by 
SCARFE (2002) at Manu Bay in addition to the meso-scale 
features identified by MEAD and BLACK (2001b). Refraction 
modeling and measurements of wave breaking location from 
video (SCARFE et al. , 2003a) by SCARFE (2002) showed 
how these features refract a nd focus waves to create the 
surfing break. It is these micr o-scale features that create 
sections with different peel angles and breaker intensities. In 
fact, SCARFE et al. (2003b) showed that meso-scale features 
are actually made up of many micro-scale components. For 
example, SCARFE et al. (2003b) used “The Poles” at Atlantic 
Beach, Florida to show that, at a meso-scale, an ebb tidal delta 
acts as a focus. The delta is comprised of many smaller 
features that act together holistically under different conditions 
to determine the location and degree of wave focusing. 
Surfing Science Review 10 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 10 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
 
Figure 9. Micro-scale reef components at M anu Bay and The Ledge. Under different wave conditions and tide heights these 
components have different effects on wave breaking (from Scarfe, 2002; Scarfe et al., 2002 and 2003a). 
DISCUSSION 
The body of knowledge about the ways surfing breaks 
create surfing waves is large enough to be used to predict the 
possible effects of coastal activities on surfing breaks and to 
design artificial surfing reefs (ASRs) (for information on 
ASRs, see BLACK, 2001a and 2001b; BLACK and MEAD, 
2001; BORRERO, 2002; EVANS and RANASIGNHE, 2001; 
MEAD, 2001; MEAD and BLACK, 2002; PATTIARATCHI, 
1999 and 2000; RANASIGNHE et al., 2001). However, at this 
time practical applications of this information are limited. 
Coastal engineering projects are still undertaken without 
considering their effects on the surfing environment. This is 
not simply caused by coastal engineers who ignore the impacts 
of their activities on surfing. Rather, a lack of education exists 
among those who manage our coasts about the mechanics of 
surfing breaks and the ways co astal modifications affect 
surfing conditions. The rise in profile and political power of 
environmental surfing organiza tions, such as the Surfrider 
Foundation and Groundswell Society, as well as the volume of 
scientific surfing information, can help to preserve and 
enhance surfing breaks. 
This paper hopes to communicate to surfing and non-
surfing coastal planners, scientists and engineers the basics of 
surfing science. Although there are still gaps in the knowledge 
about the ways in which surfing waves are created, this paper 
shows that there is sufficient understanding to incorporate 
surfing amenity into coastal projects. 
LITERATURE CITED 
ACHENBACH, J., 1998. In the Teeth of Jaws. Photographs by 
Patrick McFeeley. National Geographic November 1998: 
pp. 58-71. 
ANDREWS, C.J., 1997. Sandy shoreline response to offshore 
reefs. Hamilton, New Zealand: Department of Earth 
Science, The University of Waikato. Master’s thesis. 
BANCROFT, S., 1999. Performance monitoring of the Cable 
Stations artificial surfing reef. Department of 
Environmental Engineering, University of Western 
Australia. Honor’s thesis. 
BATTJES, J.A., 1974. Surf similarity. Proc. 14 th International 
Conference on Coastal Engineering (Copenhagen, 
Denmark). ASCE, New York. pp. 466-479. 
BLACK, K.P., 2001. Foreword – Natural and artificial reefs 
for surfing and coastal protection. In: BLACK, K. P. (ed.), 
Natural and Artificial Reefs for Surfing and Coastal 
Protection. Journal of Coasta l Research, Special Issue No. 
29, pp. 1. 
BLACK, K.P., 2001b. Artificial surfing reefs for erosion 
control and amenity: theory and application. In: Healy, T.R. 
(ed.), International Coastal Symposium (ICS2000). Journal 
of Coastal Research, Special Issue No. 34. pp. 1–14. 
BLACK, K.P. and ANDREWS, C.J., 2001a. Sandy shoreline 
response to offshore obstacles, Part 1: Salient and tombolo 
geometry and shape. In: BLACK, K. P. (ed.), Natural and 
Artificial Reefs for Surfing and Coastal Protection. Journal 
of Coastal Research, Special Issue No. 29, pp. 82-93. 
BLACK, K.P. and ANDREWS, C.J., 2001b. Sandy shoreline 
response to offshore obstacles, Part 2: Discussion of 
formative mechanisms. In: BLACK, K. P. (ed.), Natural and 
Artificial Reefs for Surfing and Coastal Protection. Journal 
of Coastal Research, Special Issue No. 29, pp. 94-101. 
BLACK, K.P. and MEAD, S.T., 2001. Wave rotation for 
coastal protection. Proceedings for Coasts and Ports 2001 – 
Surfing Science Review 11 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 11 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
the 15 th Australasian Coastal Conference and Ocean 
Engineering Conference. pp. 120-127. 
BLACK, K.P., HUTT, J.A. and MEAD, S.T., 1998. 
Narrowneck reef report 2: Surfing aspects, Technical Report 
prepared for the Gold Coast City Council, June, 1998. Joint 
Center of Excellence in Coastal Oceanography and 
University of Waikato. 120p. 
BLACK, K.P., MEAD, S.T. McCOMB, P. and HEALY, T.R., 
1999. Numerical modeling to incorporate recreational 
amenity in coastal structures on sandy and rocky coasts. 
Coastal Structures ’99 Conference (Spain), 6 June 1999. 
BLACK, K. P., MEAD, S.T. and JACKSON, A.J., 2000. 
Beach amenity options and coastal protection at 
Bournemouth. For Leisure & Tourism Services, 
Bournemouth Borough Council, by ASR Ltd. May 2000. 
116p. 
BLACK, K. P., MEAD, S.T. and MATHEW, J., 2001. Design 
and approvals for an artificial reef for protection of Noosa 
Main Beach: Detailed inves tigations and modeling and 
appendices. Report for Noosa Council and ICM Ltd, by 
ASR Ltd June 2001. 207p. 
BORRERO, J.C., 2003. 2 Years of Pratte’s Reef: Performance 
and considerations for future artificial reef endeavors in 
Santa Monica Bay. Proceedi ngs for the Second Surfing 
Arts, Science and Issues Conference (SASIC 2, Ventura, 
California, USA). 9 November. The Groundswell Society, 
pp. 19-29. 
COURIEL, E.D. and COX, R.J ., 1996. International literature 
review – Artificial Surfing. Report No. 95/39, Australia 
Water and Coastal Studies Pty. Ltd. 
DALLY, W.R., 1989. Quantifying beach surfability. Proc. 
Beach Technology Conference (T ampa, Florida) February 
1989. 
DALLY, W.R., 1990. Stochastic modeling of surfing climate. 
Proc. 22nd International Conference on Coastal Engineering, 
Delft, The Netherlands. ASCE, New York. pp 516-529. 
DALLY, W.R., 2001a. Improved stochastic models for 
surfing climate. In: BLACK, K. P. (ed.), Natural and 
Artificial Reefs for Surfing and Coastal Protection. Journal 
of Coastal Research, Special Issue No. 29, pp. 41-50. 
DALLY, W.R., 2001b. The maximum speed of surfers. In: 
BLACK, K. P. (ed.), Natural and Artificial Reefs for 
Surfing and Coastal Protection. Journal of Coastal 
Research, Special Issue No. 29, pp. 33-40. 
EVANS, P. and R. RANASIGNHE. 2001. Artificial Surfing 
Reefs: A Paradigm in Coastal Protection. Proceedings for 
Coasts and Ports 2001 – the 15 th Australasian Coastal 
Conference and Ocean Engineering Conference. 128-133. 
HUTT, J.A., 1997. Bathymetry and wave parameters defining 
the surfing quality of five adjacent reefs, Hamilton, New 
Zealand: Department of Earth Science, The University of 
Waikato. Master’s thesis. 
HUTT, J.A., BLACK, K.P. and MEAD, S.T., 2001. 
Classification of surf breaks in relation to surfing skill. In: 
BLACK, K. P. (ed.), Natural and Artificial Reefs for 
Surfing and Coastal Protection. Journal of Coastal 
Research, Special Issue No. 29, pp. 66-81. 
KOMAR, P.D., 1998. Beach proce sses and sedimentation. 2 nd 
Edition. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 
544p. 
MEAD, S.T., 2001. Incorpora ting high-quality surfing breaks 
into multi-purpose reefs. Hamilton, New Zealand: 
Department of Earth Science, University of Waikato, Ph.D. 
thesis. 
MEAD, S.T. and BLACK, K.P., 1999a A multi-purpose, 
artificial reef at Mount Ma unganui Beach, New Zealand. 
Coastal Management Journal. 27(4). pp. 355-365. 
MEAD, S.T. and BLACK, K.P., 1999b. Configuration of 
large-scale reef components at a world-class surfing break: 
Bingin Reef, Bali, Indonesia. Proceedings for Coasts and 
Ports Conference ’99, Vol. 2, pp. 438-443. 
MEAD, S.T. and BLACK, K.P., 2001a. Field studies leading 
to the bathymetric classifi cation of world-class surfing 
breaks. In: BLACK, K. P. (ed.), Natural and Artificial Reefs 
for Surfing and Coastal Protection. Journal of Coastal 
Research, Special Issue No. 29, pp. 5-20. 
MEAD, S.T. and BLACK, K.P., 2001b. Functional component 
combinations controlling surfing quality at world-class 
surfing breaks. In: BLACK, K. P. (ed.), Natural and 
Artificial Reefs for Surfing and Coastal Protection. Journal 
of Coastal Research, Special Issue No. 29, pp. 21-32. 
MEAD, S.T. and BLACK, K.P., 2001c. Predicting the breaker 
intensity of surfing waves. In: BLACK, K. P. (ed.), Natural 
and Artificial Reefs for Surfing and Coastal Protection. 
Journal of Coastal Research, Special Issue No. 29, pp. 51-
65. 
MEAD, S.T. and BLACK, K.P., 2002. Multi-purpose reefs 
provide multiple benefits - Amalgamating coastal 
protection, high quality surfing breaks and ecological 
enhancement to maximize user benefits and development 
opportunities. Proceedings for the Second Surfing Arts, 
Science and Issues Conference (SASIC 2, Ventura, 
California, USA). 9 November. The Groundswell Society, 
pp. 47-63. 
MEAD, S.T., BLACK, K.P., GREEN, M., HUME, T.M., 
HUTT, J.A. and SAYCE, A., 1997. High seabed gradients 
and low peel angles produce world-class surfing breaks. 
New Zealand Marine Science Society Annual Conference. 
University of Auckland, 8-11 July, 1997. 
MEAD, S.T., BLACK, K.P. and HUTT, J.A., 1998. An 
artificial offshore reef at Tay Street – Mount Maunganui 
Beach: Report 1 – Reef design and physical a nd biological 
processes. Joint report, Department of Earth Science, 
University of Waikato and NIWA, July 1998. 
MEAD, S.T., BLACK, K.P. and McCOMB, P., 2001. Lyall 
Bay Surfing Reef Feasibility Study. For the Lyall Bay 
Surfing Reef Charitable Trust, Wellington, January 2001. 
77p. 
Surfing Science Review 12 
 
Integrative Oceanography Division 12 Abstract 
eScholarship Repository, 2003 
MOFFATT & NICHOL ENGINEERS, 1989. The Patagonia 
surfing reef feasibility study – Report prepared for The 
Surfrider Foundation, Hunti ngton Beach, California by 
Moffatt & Nichol Engineers, Long Beach, California, 
September, 1989. Report No. 2521. 
MOORES, A.E., 2001. Using video images to quantify wave 
sections and surfer paramete rs. Hamilton, New Zealand: 
Department of Earth Science, The University of Waikato. 
Master’s thesis. 
PATTIARATCHI, C. 1997. Design studies for an artificial 
surfing reef at Cable Sta tion, Western Australia, 
Proceedings for the 1 st International Surfing Reef 
Symposium (Sydney, Australia), University of Sydney, pp. 
87-90. 
PATTIARATCHI, C. 1999. Design studies for an artificial 
surfing reef at Cable Sta tion, Western Australia, 
Proceedings for Coasts and Ports ’99 (Perth, WA, 
Australia), vol. 2, pp.490-495. 
PATTIARATCHI, C. 2000. Design studies and performance 
monitoring of an artificial surfing reef: Cable Station, 
Western Australia. Proc. 27 th International Conference on 
Coastal Engineering, Sydney, Australia. ASCE, New York. 
PATTIARATCHI, C., MASSELINK, G. and HURST, P., 
1999. Surfability of the Pert h metropolitan coastline: An 
assessment. Proceedings for Coasts and Ports ’99 (Perth, 
WA, Australia), vol. 2, pp. 490-495. 
RAICHLE, A.W., 1998. Numerical predictions of surfing 
conditions at Mavericks, Ca lifornia. Shore and Beach, 
April, vol. 66, no. 2, pp.26-30. 
RANASIGNHE, R., HACKING, N. and EVANS, P., 2001. 
Multi-functional artificial surf breaks: A review. Report 
published by NSW Department of Land and Water 
Conservation, Centre for Natural Resources. Parramatta, 
Australia. 53p. 
SAYCE, A., 1997. Transformation of surfing waves on steep 
and complex reefs. Hamilton, New Zealand: Department of 
Earth Science, The University of Waikato. Master’s thesis. 
SAYCE, A., BLACK, K.P. and GORMAN, R., 1999. 
Breaking Wave Shape on Surfing Reefs. Proceedings for 
Coasts and Ports Conference ’99, Vol. 2, pp. 596-603. 
SCARFE, B.E., 1999. Hydrographic surveying and 
photogrammetry: Application to artificial surfing reef 
studies, Dunedin, New Zealand: School of Surveying, The 
University of Otago. Honor’s Dissertation 
SCARFE, B.E., 2002. Categorising surfing manoeuvres using 
wave and reef characteristics. Hamilton, New Zealand: 
Department of Earth Science, The University of Waikato. 
Master’s thesis. 
SCARFE, B.E., de LANGE, W.P., BLACK, K.P. and MEAD, 
S.T., 2002. The influence of surfing wave parameters on 
manoeuvre type from field investigations at Raglan, New 
Zealand. Proceedings for the Second Surfing Arts, Science 
and Issues Conference (SASIC 2, Ventura, California, 
USA). 9 November. The Groundswell Society, pp. 74-89. 
SCARFE, B.E., BLACK, K.P ., CHONG, A.K., de LANGE, 
W.L., PHILLIPS, D. and MEAD, S.T., 2003a. The 
application of surveying techniques to artificial surfing reef 
studies. Trans Tasman Surveyor, April 2003, in press. 
SCARFE, B.E., ELWANY, M.H.S., BLACK, K.P. and 
MEAD, S.T., 2003b. Surfing conditions around jetties . 
Center for Coastal Studies, Scripps Institute of 
Oceanography, La Jolla, CA. SIO Ref. No.03-XX 
SCARFE, B.E., ELWANY, M.H.S., BLACK, K.P. and 
MEAD, S.T., 2003c. Surfing breaks around jetty structures. 
Journal of Coastal Research; This Issue. ppXX 
SYMONDS, G. and BLACK, K.P., 2001. Predicting wave-
driven currents on surfing reefs. In: BLACK, K. P. (ed.), 
Natural and Artificial Reefs for Surfing and Coastal 
Protection. Journal of Coasta l Research, Special Issue No. 
29, pp. 102-114. 
WALKER, J.R. and PALMER, R.Q., 1971. The general surf 
site concept. LOOK Laboratory TR-18, University of 
Hawaii, Department of Ocean Engineering, Honolulu, 
Hawaii. 
WALKER, J.R., PALMER, R.Q. and KUKEA, J.K., 1972. 
Recreational surfing on Hawaiian reefs. Proceedings for the 
13th Coastal Engineering Conference. 
WALKER, J.R., 1974a. Recreational surfing parameters. 
LOOK Laboratory TR-30, University of Hawaii, 
Department of Ocean Engineering, Honolulu, Hawaii. 
WALKER, J.R., 1974b. Wave transformations over a sloping 
bottom and over a three-dimensional shoal. Honolulu, 
Hawaii, USA: Department of Ocean Engineering, 
University of Hawaii, Ph.D. thesis. 
WEST, A.S., COWELL, P., BATTJES, J. A., STIVE, M. J. F., 
DOORN, N. and ROELVINK, J. A., 2002. Wave-focusing 
surfing reefs – A new concept. Proceedings for the Second 
Surfing Arts, Science and Issues Conference (SASIC 2, 
Ventura, California, USA). 9 November. The Groundswell 
Society, pp. 31-41. 
 
 