[PAGE 1] Storm Breakers is an all-in-one Unity package designed for epic ocean simulations. Featuring a unique wave model, realistic breaking waves with visual, audio and physical effect, an extra-documented buoyancy physics adjustable for any gameplay, a scalable splash visual effect synchronized to procedural audio, and a dynamically textured water with realistic rendering. This package is suitable for both simulations and arcade games, it allows for unique gameplay like surfing waves, surviving a storm and satisfying experiences. About this document This documentation is a fairly big one with its 140+ pages. This is because the Storm Breakers package has many features and this document explains them all in broad terms with many images so as to provide a good understanding and how to use them. This document is designed to be quickly browsed through. Take a look at the whole document by reading the titles, the underlined text and looking at the image and their legend. You’ll know about what is important to notice and all the existing features. Then you can come back to read thoroughly when you need more info. To start using the Storm Breakers package, you may read the Getting Started section that is written as a tutorial. Some tutorial videos will be edited soon to improve the user experience. This document is not designed to be printed. If you wish to, please ask for a printable version in the Discord support server.

[PAGE 2] Support To get support for using Storm Breakers package, join the Discord support server or send an email at lysandre.creations@gmail.com Sponsor I, Lysandre, a French engineer passionate about boats, sea and waves, am currently the only developer of the whole package : the innovative ocean model, the writing of shaders, the physics, the visual effects, procedural audio and all the explanations/diagrams of this documentation. Me sailing. It took about a year to complete for the first release, it was mainly a job of passion done in full time mostly. I thank all my relatives for bringing me support during the developpement that otherwise would not have been possible. I sell this package so as to earn back a bit of what it cost me to develop it, but the main goal is to share my vision of the ocean : an epic terrain of adventure ! There are not enough game mechanics based on the waves in the market, and I hope by providing you this package you will change this by making awesome games ! That being said, the quality of the whole package is the one I could provide being solo and still a Unity learner (this is one of my first Unity projects), there might be some unspotted bugs, some visual quality to be improved and so on. The package is still in active development and is meant to be updated in time for increasing quality and new features, this documentation tells about all the planned updates. To upgrade this package to another level, any support from you will greatly help. Also another project is planned to make shallow water simulation with real plugging waves. This is even harder to do than it was to code Storm Breakers, so if you want real surfing waves consider supporting me ! You can support me with technical support or by donating to the demo at Itch.io !

[PAGE 3] Table of contents Release note : Describes all the updates on the Storm Breakers package. Getting started : Tutorial to use the Storm Breaker package quickly. Global architecture overview : How the engine is structured. Waves model overview : A description of the innovative wave model. Physic overview : How the physics is implemented and how you can adjust it. Rendering overview : A description on the rendering. Visual effect overview : How the particle systems are processed. Audio overview : How the audio is implemented. Gameplay overview : Some gameplay considerations. Unity editor interface overview : Some words about the Unity interface of the package. Performance overview : Considerations about the performances of Storm Breakers. Example scenes : What the example scenes contain. Prefabs references : How to use the prefabs provided in the package. Scripts references : Extended descriptions of all the scripts and how to use them. Visual effect references : Descriptions of the visual effect properties. Materials references : Description of the materials and their properties.

[PAGE 4] Release note ● 01/2023 ○ Initial Release. ● 09/2023 ○ Shoreline effects implementation : ■ Addition of a Terrain field in the Ocean Controller component to activate the shoreline effects. ○ Wave model updates : ■ Wave height is reduced near the shoreline to simulate shore breaking. ■ Breaking speed and torque are increased as the wave height is reduced to simulate shore breaking. ■ Group speed is not anymore a function of the intensity but always half the wave celerity, might impact the aspect of a calm sea. ○ Water shading updates : ■ Implementation of the ground color scattering near shoreline. ■ More accurate reflections and color of the surface. Might need to adjust the water color when updating. ■ Improved shading of the underwater water surface. ■ Particles culled underwater. ○ Visual effects updates : ■ Implementation of the breaking waves visual effects near shoreline. The waves break as their height is reduced to simulate shore breaking. ■ Modifiable light occlusion for the sea foam burst particles of the Water Interaction VFX graph. ○ Audio effects updates : ■ Implementation of the breaking waves audio effect near shoreline. Roughly sync with the visual effects. ■ Fixed bug for the breaking wave audio to make it more sync with the VFX and physics. ○ Physics update : ■ No possible uses of the job system when using shoreline effects. ○ New component implementation : ■ Water Effects to make visual and audio effects without the physics.

[PAGE 5] Getting started This section explains the steps to use the Storm Breakers package in a project. Requirements Here are the following requirements that need to be checked before importing and using Storm Breakers. Unity 2021 LTS + Universal Render Pipeline (URP) Visual effect graph package Limitations and known bugs The Storm Breakers package is still in active development and some limitation and bugs are not yet fixed: ● Skybox ambient light mode is currently not supported to greatly optimize particle rendering, if you use this mode then the particle lighting might be wrong. ● The breaking wave particles are not synchronized with the waves when not in play mode. ● It is recommended to use the provided skybox material to improve the water reflection. Otherwise you might face wrong reflections if the bottom of your skybox is of a different color than the sky. ● When saving the scene or refreshing the asset, some properties of the ocean material might revert to a previous state (waves setup, terrain integration). Click on the tick box “Click Here To Refresh” of the Ocean Controller component to refresh the material with the good properties.

[PAGE 6] Importing Storm Breakers into a project The steps for importing the Storm Breakers package into a project. URP configuration For the water transparency to be properly rendered, it is required to enable depth texture in the URP asset. If you don’t know which current pipeline is used or where it is saved, you can see it by going to Edit /Project Setting/Graphics and clicking on the scriptable render pipeline field, this will highlight the asset file in the project browser window. VFX graph configuration Before using Storm Breakers , make sure you have imported the VFX graph package from the package manager window. Then go in edit/preference/Visual Effects and make sure you have the highlighted settings on : Scene configuration To be able to see the waves movings smoothly in the scene view, enable always refresh mode :

[PAGE 7] Creating a scene with a template It is recommended to use Storm Breakers by using the provided scene template for a better user experience. To do so, use the new scene dialog in File/New Scene . Select Storm Breakers scene template and click on Create . In the new scene dialog, enter the name of the scene and choose the path where you want it to be saved. The new scene dialog will then create a new scene and a folder named the same as the scene. In this folder you will find clones of the ocean material and skybox material, you will be able to modify their properties for having changes in the new scene without having impacts on any other scene. In the scene that has been created, you will find the basics for editing your level : an ocean, a directional light, a wind controller object and a playable boat. Note that you can immediately play the scene, you can control the camera with the mouse and the boat with the arrows of your keyboard and play in the waves. A scene created with the scene template. In this scene you can change the environment, mind the ambient and skybox limitation . Setting up the ocean Now that your scene is created, you can set up the ocean. Here are the basic steps to do so.

[PAGE 8] Water color You can change the color of the water with the corresponding field of the Ocean Controller component of the game object ocean. As a general rule, the clearer and deeper the water is, the darker its albedo is. See Ocean Controller component reference for more details. The default color is based on a real sea color. Waves The Ocean Controller component allows you to fully set up the waves. There are 4 wave layers that need to be in the order of the largest wavelength. Use the first slider “wave intensity” to quickly turn on and off the waves in the ocean without modifying their relative properties. If you want to change the height of the wave, you may use the wavelength sliders and intensity sliders. The wavelength will change the scale of the wave while the intensity will change the sharpness. You can check the swell height and period in the bottom of the component (read only field). Otherwise you can tweak the other sliders to change the wave looks and direction, see Wave model overview chapter and Ocean Controller component reference in this document for more detail on how to precisely set up the waves.

[PAGE 9] Wind The scene template creates a game object called wind. This game object is not necessary for the simulation to work but it adds a nice audio and it also changes the looks of the water surface according to the wind strength you provide. I can also simulate the wind caused by the velocity of the camera. In the component Wind Controller, you can set up the wind direction and speed in the unit you want. You can also set up the height at which the wind is full strength (at sea level the wind is halved). Turn on the gizmos to have a visualization of the wind vectors. The wind is represented by the blue lines in Gizmos mode. Terrain Storm Breakers package includes the effects of the ocean near a shoreline. To do so you have to add a terrain in the scene and identify it in the Ocean Controller component. Then you have to set up the Ocean material to adjust the ground color scattering.

[PAGE 10] Adding watercraft in the scene Storm Breakers includes all the effects to simulate the interaction of watercraft in the water : buoyancy, visual effect and audio. Using a prefab To add a boat or ship in the scene, select the playable boat prefab or NPC boat prefab that are located in the folder 2-Prefabs & template , drag and drop it in the scene where you want it to start. Both prefabs are quite similar, the difference is that the playable boat contains a camera setup while the NPC is set up with the automatic pilot on. (If you set 2 playable boats in the scene, there will be conflict with the camera and the input system.) The scene created with the template already contains a playable boat with a mesh renderer set to a white lit material so you can see it in the game when playing immediately after creating the scene. The prefabs have a green grid material attached to preview the simulated mesh generated by the Hull Generator component, this material will not be rendered in the game and act as an helper. You can unpack the prefab to have more freedom. Set the 3D model of your boat as a child of the game object, set its position to zero and modify the rotation so it is aligned with the default simulated mesh. Check the scale of your model , it should correspond to the real world object with units in meters.

[PAGE 11] Setting up the simulated mesh The simulation uses a specific mesh and computes all the effects per triangles on this mesh. So the simulated mesh must have a decent number of triangles or your game will run into high CPU overhead. Storm breakers package provides 2 ways of setting the simulated mesh : either using an existing convex mesh collider if you have a suitable one, or create one procedurally using the Hull Generator component. It is recommended to use the tool when suited as it will allow you to change the shape of the hull and optimize the simulation by tweaking the number of triangles in the generated mesh. To choose between the two ways, enable the Hull Generator component if you want to build it procedurally, or deactivate it and set your mesh collider in the mesh collider component. If you choose to build the simulated mesh procedurally, set the properties and curves in the Hul Generator component so it fits the hull of your model. See Hull Generator component reference in this document for more detail on how to use it. You can deactivate the ocean while working on the hull to have a clearer view : It is not a big issue to have a rough approximation of the hull shape, it will barely have a visual impact on the effects. It’s actually recommended to take some liberty on this shape so as to tweak the dynamic behavior of the watercraft, see the physics overview section of this document for more info on how to tweak the physics. The quad should be as square as possible. The mesh renderer with the material HullGeneratorhelper acts as a helper by showing you the quad (2 triangles) that are generated and highlighting the edges that are close to the model. Once you are satisfied with the mesh, you can deactivate the mesh renderer if it annoys you, it will be deactivated anyway in the game if it’s the helper material. Note : you can choose whether to set the generated mesh as a collider or not by ticking the box of the Hull Generator component. If set to not, you will have to define an existing convex mesh collider, this mesh will be used by the internal unity physics engine while the generated one will be used by the Storm Breakers engine.

[PAGE 12] Setting up the buoyancy Now that the simulated mesh is defined, you have to set up the buoyancy effect. For that you need to go in the Water Interaction component. This component is designed so that most of the effects scale with the size of the object, yet some tweakings are inevitable. First, make sure the ocean game object is active and turn off the wave by setting their intensity to 0. This will make a flat water in which it’s easier to set up the physics properties. If it’s a NPC boat, you have to deactivate its controller to avoid it moving. You may also deactivate the audio and visual effect in the Water Interaction component by ticking the corresponding box so you are not bothered by those effects while setting up the physics. Then launch the game, the boat should float somehow. What you have to do is set up the density and the gravity center’s position until the boat floats correctly at its water line. See Water Interaction component reference for more detail on how to set up the physics. ● If the game object contains colliders as childs, they will be used by the rigidbody inertia computation, so check if they are consistent. ● If the boat immediately capsizes, you should lower the gravity center before entering the play mode. ● If the boat oscillates too much, you should increase the built-in drag coefficients of the rigid body. ● If the boat moves on its own permanently and the controller is not activated (this is due to some computation approximation), you may tick “Orient Force Vertically” to set the forces acting only vertically. Untick this as soon as the watercraft is in motion to avoid wrong physics. ● Before leaving the play mode, don’t forget to save the modified properties by copying the component and pasting it as values when returning in edit mode. You can activate the gizmo mode to see the position of the gravity center (yellow wire sphere) and the forces acting on the hull (red and blue lines).

[PAGE 13] Once the static stability is set up, you may tweak the dynamic stability. For that, use the transform rotation tool to heel the boat and see how it reacts. ● If the boat capsizes at a too small helling, lower the gravity center ● Tweak the gravity center as high as possible until the boat right itself at a reasonably slow speed (a second or so depending on its size). If set too low the boat will be too sensitive in the waves, see the physic overview for more details. ● You can tweak the inertia tensor factor function of the watercraft geometry, the default values being set according to a classic hull. If you have colliders as childs in the game object, the rigidbody automatically includes them in the inertia computation. ● Again don’t forget to save the modification done in game mode to set and save them in edit mode. Then you may try to make the watercraft navigate in the waves by setting back their intensity and activating the controller. If its behavior doesn’t suit you, see Physics overview for a complete discussion on how to tweak the dynamic of a watercraft, and Water Interaction component reference for more details on the component setup. Setting up the controller Storm Breakers provide a basic boat controller that makes a propeller and rudder force. It has an automatic pilot that can maintain the course with a constant propeller force. If the automatic pilot is set to off, the game input will pilot the boat controller (arrows or WASD by default in Unity). To set up the controller, position it at the boat’s propeller and rudder position for a realistic behavior. You can turn on the gizmos to visualize its direction. Be careful that the default values provided don’t automatically scale with the size of the boat, you may drastically change them according to the weight of the boat it is attached to.

[PAGE 14] If you enable the automatic pilot, it will automatically maintain the course it has when enabled and use as much throttle you set. See Boat Controller component reference for more details on how to set it up. Setting up the visual effects and audio Once the physics of your boat is set up, you can go on to the visual effects and audio setup. For that the easiest is to enable the automatic pilot of the controller so the watercraft moves on its own while you tweak the values, and to set up a bit of waves on the ocean to make more splashes. Then enter play mode to see and hear the effects. The particle system should scale well to any kind of size, but tweaking is necessary to polish the effect. See the particle overview section of this document for an in-depth knowledge of the water interaction particle system. Mind that there are some properties set in the Water Interaction component while most of the others are on the VFX inspector. Don’t forget to copy the properties before leaving play mode. For the audio you might need to tweak the volume factor and pitch factor function of the size of the watercraft. Do it in the Water Interaction component. Adding a deck mask It is recommended to create a so-called deck mask that enclose the railing of the boat to prevent the water and particles to be seen on the deck. If the railing of the boat is not watertight (with gunport for example), this mask will currently leave an unset color in the opening (this is meant to be fixed). So you

[PAGE 15] may have to consider either closing the openings or not using a deck mask (this will look like the water is coming through the opening), or leave the unset color if the openings are small enough. To build this mask, you can use the Unity Probuilder package and assign the mesh the water&ParticleMask material. The mask will become invisible but no water nor particles will be drawn behind. Step 1 : create as a child a plane with several cuts along the length. Step 2 : center the new geometry and position the edges on the top of the railings. You may break the regularity of the cuts to closely follow the railings.

[PAGE 16] Step 3 : use the scale tool to adjust the width of the mask at each cut. For the bow you may triangulate the first quad and remove a triangle. Step 4 : remove the collider and attach the water&ParticleMask from the ‘4-Materials’ folder of Storm Breakers. Setting up the camera If you use the playable boat prefab, it includes the setup for an universal orbital camera that follows the object it is attached to without its rotation. It works both for a first person view and a third person view, you can switch from one to the other by scrolling up and down the mouse wheel. The camera setup also includes a zoom feature in the first person. See Camera Controller for more details. The universal camera setup provided in Storm Breakers.

[PAGE 17] You can use any other camera setup, mind that there must be one camera tagged “main camera” in the scene, it will be used to align the ocean mesh and orient the particles. Also if you want the underwater rendering to be effective, you must set a quad at the near clipping plane of the camera. See Underwater component and material reference. Insert ocean in existing scene It is possible to add an ocean in an existing scene without using the scene template, simply drag and drop the ocean prefab in the scene. It will automatically be positioned in front of the camera at world y = 0. You cannot currently set it at a different height. Adding dynamic reflection Storm Breakers provide an approximate way to make the reflection of dynamic objects in the water without using the screen space reflections that are unavailable in Unity URP. The trick is that it positions a reflection probe as a mirror to the camera relative to the sea level. It works only for good graphic hardware and on almost flat water. Drag the Reflection Probe prefab in the scene to activate this effect. You may have to tweak the reflection probe properties to fit your project quality and hardware, the default setup being of a low quality.

[PAGE 18] Global architecture overview Storm Breakers has been coded in a very forward way, notably the ocean model is computed many times with different codes through the CPU and GPU without any callback from any of these codes. This way of coding, although being harder to maintain, provides a very fast computation. The following diagram shows which ocean-related files participate in which effect. This is possible thanks to the fact that the water surface is one deterministic mathematical function. It will be difficult to add other kinds of waves like the wake waves of an object moving through the water. While it could be possible to add one mathematical function on top of the ocean model, what would be tricky is to add an unbounded number of them because GPUs don’t allow much conditional computing. So for now there are no plans on adding the wake waves, a rogue wave might be added in future updates depending on user feedback though. The determinism of the ocean model is bound to the floating arithmetic approximation. On large distances and for long times, the float values might get imprecise and lead to some artifacts. It is not known yet whether those approximations are different on GPU and CPU and when it happens on both. So if you plan on making an open world where you sail for a very long time, it would be recommended to have a fix that would bring the spatial and temporal origin back to the present time and position. This fix might be included in Storm Breakers futures updates.

[PAGE 19] Waves model overview At the heart of Storm Breakers lies an innovative and unique wave model that makes a more realistic rendering in agitated water. Both the shape of the wave and their repartition in space were designed with a new approach. In this section it is explained how this has been coded, you may need to know about if you want to refine the setup of the waves. Note the relative isolation of the large wave, this is thanks to the innovative model. Deep water waves The wave model of Storm Breakers is mostly suitable for deep water. Ocean, sea or large lake can be rendered in Storm Breakers. Shoreline waves are simulated very simply by reducing their height when approaching the shoreline. The maximal value is a function of the depth but also a bit of the wavelength to make the wave rise and lower a bit on the shore. The visual effects are then triggered as well as the procedural audio and some physics effects to simulate shore breaking waves. Lake waves are deep water waves too, but with a smaller scale. A thinner and bounded mesh is needed to render them and is not currently supported by Storm Breakers that focus on ocean and sea. Rivers waves resemble at some point with the deep water waves, but it would require many adjustments to be rendered through this model, so they are not supported. Waves shape Waves are coded with a more advanced technique than with the classical water circular trajectory used in the Gerstener model or many others. Here is a description of what is new. Sharp waves An effort has been done to make the waves have the correct shape when near breaking, which is a crest with a sharp 120° angle, its height being 0.17 times its wavelength. Using solely a sine function like it is done in most of the other ocean models might be very handy and a very good approximation in calm water, but it can’t make such a shape. It either makes a concave wave which looks too thin and brittle, or the crest is too round. Only with the sharp 120° crest a wave looks both strong and aggressive and this has been implemented in Storm Breakers by using more functions than sines.

[PAGE 20] Also the waves are not symmetrical to the sea level, there is more crest height than trough depth to simulate the non linearity of the wave. Not only making sharp waves makes them look more dangerous, it also provides a new gameplay possibility, and not the least : with more straight slopes, we can surf the waves more easily ! Note the straight slope of the wave, this is thanks to that we can surf them. Vertical and horizontal deformation A wave is not only a vertical movement of the water, there is also a horizontal displacement. In reality, at low amplitude the water moves in orbit around their rest position, at high amplitude the movement becomes an open ellipse. The water doesn’t come back to its original position after a high intensity wave passes, it’s called Stock drift. The exact trajectory of the water has not been coded in Storm Breakers. First because a drift is not possible without keeping the mesh steady, and secondly because it has been decided that the external shape of the waves matters more than the wave velocity which is less visible. The actual trajectory is bound to the sharp crest and the following aspect of the wave . Having an horizontal deformation on the waves makes the computing of the water height non obvious. See physics overview in this document to learn how this has been solved.

[PAGE 21] Naturally tessellated waves The trouble with a sharp crest is that it would jitter while moving due to the mesh size. A tessellation would be required near the crest to make sure there is a maximum mesh density here. This has been implemented without actually adding triangles through a shader tessellation, but using the horizontal deformation of the wave. In reality the water is compressed at the crest (which is actually why the water elevates to form a wave), in Storm Breakers this effect has been amplified up to the point that the mesh becomes almost infinitely dense at the crest so the crest doesn't jitter. Mesh density is increased at the crests to improve their rendering. The downside of this way of coding waves is that the water needs to move faster forward at the crest, and faster backward at the trough. Seasoned eyes might spot that unrealistic aspect. Wave intensity The crest is sharp only for waves near breaking. Lower amplitude of waves would lead to a classic round shape like it coded in most ocean models. The way Storm Breakers blends between calm and breaking waves is through the value called wave intensity . When this value is near 0, the amplitude is very low and the waves are round. When the intensity is near 1, the waves become sharper and higher. At 1 is the limit of breaking, the wave height is 0.17 times the wavelength like in reality, and the crest sharp. Above 1 the amplitude is clamped so as not to rise any higher, simulating roughly the fact the wave breaks.

[PAGE 22] In the order of the highest wave : intensity > = 1, intensity = 0.6, intensity = 0.3 Breaking wave The breaking waves in Storm Breakers are done through an advanced particle system and through procedural audio. They also make an extra force that can capsize small boats. See corresponding section of this document for the details on how the effects work. A 3.5m high breaker in a storm. Like explained before, the mesh isn’t deformed to render the lip of a breaking wave. However, recent research showed that it might be possible to code plugging breaking waves using the internal group position to have access to the wave history. Future updates of Storm Breakers might include such a feature. Groups of waves The ocean rendered with only one layer of wave, revealing the groups. Unlike other wave models like Gerstner or Fast Fourrier Transformed (FFT) that build waves by superposing a high number of infinite and permanent wave layers, Storm Breakers model try to get

[PAGE 23] closer to the real physics by coding waves as groups, or sets. This has many impacts on the visual and the gameplay capacity, this documentation tells about that. Definition of groups What is a group, or set of waves ? It’s the fact that waves are not infinite but localized and grouped. The amplitude of the waves within the group vary, being maximal in the middle and null at the edges of the group. It is commonly known by surfers that waves arrive by a set of several waves, and it is the same phenomena. Number of waves per group So how many waves are there in a group ? That depends on how old they are and the answer is not a round number. An old swell that travels hundreds of kilometers in the ocean can reach a half dozen or more waves with the ones at the edge barely visible. This is what surfers are used to see and it’s the origin of some sayings like the 6th wave is bigger. What about at sea ? When the waves are younger they barely build a group of several waves. In situ observation showed that in agitated water, the breaking swell rarely reaches more than 2 or 3 waves. In Storm Breakers you can adjust this number with the sliders in the Ocean Controller component called Set Number. Most of the time you don’t need to tweak much these parameters though, low values between 1 and 2 are good to render most of the sea state. Only an old swell would require a number higher than 3 and even this would lead to some weird visuals. On the right groups with 2 waves, on the left with 5 waves The larger is this number, the longer the wave exists and so it helps surfing them if you wish to set up such a gameplay. Because of the way the groups are scattered, the wave number has quite an influence on the wave density as explained further in this document. Group speed One important consequence of coding waves as groups is that we can then code the group speed. The group speed is the speed at which the amplitude moves, which can be different from the wave speed (the celerity). In deep water, according to the Airy theory, the group speed is half the celerity. This has a major impact on the waves and it explains why we can never track down a wave for a long distance in real sea : a wave appears at the back of the group, it builds up, sometimes up to the point of breaking, and then disappears, leaving another wave behind.. This is quite easy to see in agitated waters : when a wave breaks, another one just behind appears and breaks too because it reaches the middle of the group as well. This effect can be seen for several breakers and so we can see the group moving. This is implemented the same way in the Storm Breakers wave model.

[PAGE 24] Group independency Coding waves as groups is like coding them as objects and they can behave on their own. Each group benefits from a randomized phase so their waves are not synchronized with other’s, and their position can be scattered a bit (depending on the wave density) to avoid having groups being aligned. Another thing is that the intensity in the middle of the group varies with time independently of the others. So when a wave of the group breaks, the others behind might too but after a certain time the group loses its amplitude and the wave breaks no more. Further later the amplitude will build again. This makes the wave a bit less predictable. Another thing that is coded is that the phase within the group varies function of the intensity. At high intensity the phase is advanced in the middle of the group, this makes a realistic horseshoe shape to the waves and gives them more visual power. The subsurface scattering highlights the horseshoe shape of the small waves.

[PAGE 25] Wave systems First system Adding the second system. Adding the third system Adding the fourth system Definition of system The way Storm Breakers is coded is that it creates layers of grouped waves called systems. A system contains non-overlapping groups of waves of the same wavelength and direction. Technically each system is an amplitude map applied to waves, the map moving at a different speed than the wave to create the group speed effect. The amplitude maps separate groups in a rhombus grid, each group will benefit from a randomized phase and random position within its rhombus. This helps break any visible pattern.

[PAGE 26] System implementation Currently there are 4 waves systems implemented in Storm Breakers. For some special sea states it can be a bit limiting, but the aim was to reduce the number of parameters to tweaks and to maintain good performances. Indeed while other ocean models may have more layers, each layer in Storm Breakers is longer to compute being more complex. Though, thanks to the randomization of each group, visible patterns are easily removed and so 4 layers is enough for most sea states. The current ocean controller component allows you to tweak every aspect of each system. See the component reference for a full description of all the properties. Wave density One advantage of the way the wave systems are coded is that we can tweak the wave density. This can be very important depending on your gameplay, for a lot of visuals you will need a lot of waves, but navigating through them might make you reduce their number to ease the steering. With a high density of waves, the ocean is chaotic. Lowering the density makes the ocean much easier to ride and to predict. Since within a system groups cannot overlap, the density is coupled with their randomized position. With a density set too full in the Ocean Controller component, the group follows exactly the rhombus grid that is used to separate them. Then the pattern can become obvious if there is no other layered system with waves about the same size.

[PAGE 27] To avoid this pattern, reduce the wave density or bring the other systems to a similar wavelength and intensity. The set number also affects the density somehow by widening the groups. This is why this value shouldn’t be too high, or more systems would be required to render the sea. Wave superiority The way the systems overlap each other is not a linear addition of the deformation they cause, the concept of superiority is coded in the model : A large wave (long wavelength) with sufficient intensity will cause the smaller waves with the same direction to break and spill all their energy away, leaving almost nothing behind it. It’s like large waves erase smaller waves with the same direction. This effect can easily be seen in real waves. When we see a large breaking wave, it’s one wave. Not much of other smaller waves on it, it’s surface is almost smooth. This is because the wave of the same group that passed before erased almost everything here. Not only coding this is realistic, it also makes the large waves look even bigger and dangerous. Note how smooth the water is within a large group. Wave superiority implementation This effect is coded in the Storm Breaker ocean model. Since the waves and groups are not objects but merely mathematical functions, it is not possible to know if they have been erased by a large wave in the

[PAGE 28] past. What is coded is that the intensity within the group is used to clamp the amplitude of smaller wavelengths. This makes smaller waves being gradually erased inside groups of larger wavelengths, but they also build back to their original amplitude when leaving this group (which could be explained as the wind building again the waves.) Direction-wise superiority The direction of the overlapping group is taken into account. When exactly in the same direction, the superiority of large waves fully acts, but when the direction diverges it becomes less effective. This up to the point that there is no amplitude clamping starting when waves move with more than 90° direction difference, then the deformations of each wave add to each other, leading to a high and steep wave. With the 4 system at 90° direction difference, it makes over-sharp waves. When the 2 systems are moving in opposite directions, the mesh can self-intersect ! There is no fix for this except to lower the waves intensity. Achievable sea states With this innovative ocean model and thanks to the visual effects, it is possible to render various sea states. Here are some examples sorted with increasing agitation Glassy sea.

[PAGE 29] Calm sea with a gentle breeze. Freshening wind. Cross sea

[PAGE 30] Stormy sea Unrealistic sea state designed for gameplay with 10m high breakers.

[PAGE 31] Waves predictability One of the outcomes of the described features is the fact we can tweak the waves predictability. You can make predictable waves if your gameplay makes the player sail through them. This could be part of the game mechanic : reading the ocean, spotting the large group of breaking waves, deducing their bearing and steering accordingly. Or you can make a chaotic ocean if you only wish to render an ocean without any visible pattern. Those are the parameters to set up more predictability (do the opposite for less predictability) - More difference between system’s wavelength - More difference between system’s intensity - Less wave density - Less direction difference between system - Larger set number on the predictable systems

[PAGE 32] Physic overview To fully benefit from the new wave model, Storm Breakers package provides all the required tools to make objects interact efficiently with the water, including buoyancy. There is also an API to get the water height, normal and velocity if you wish to use another physics system. How water is detected How the water is detected is non obvious since the wave generates both vertical and horizontal deformation. If we compute the wave under an object’s position, it is likely to return a point that is too far from the object due to the horizontal deformation, especially for large waves where this deformation can be of several meters. It is not required to know how Storm Breakers deals with that if you use its physics, but if you wish to use the Get Water API, you might need to understand it because it’s not straightforward. So if we compute the water deformation to an object below or above a point where we want to get the water height, it is likely to return a position that is not below or above the object. We call the “undeformed position” the water position before the wave computation, and the “deformed position” the water position after the waves apply their deformation. The undeformed position is where we want to compute the water height, speed and normal, the deformed position is where we want the water to be above or below the object for which we want to get the water height, normal and speed. The vertical alignment between the object and the deformed position must be the maximal because the gravitational pressure evolves in this direction with the depth. What Storm Breakers do is to start with a variable that represents the undeformed position (generally initialized with the horizontal object’s position), compute the deformation from this point, and get the position difference between the water deformed position and the object position. Then it adds this difference to the undeformed position variable so next time the waves are computed there, the deformed position will be closer to the object's position. This is done once or twice per frame in the game, the water data are then computed from the undeformed position. The trick is to loop continuously in the game to always get the deformed position as close as possible to the object's horizontal position without computing the waves too much per frame. It’s like a real time root-finding algorithm.

[PAGE 33] When the difference between the object and the deformed position is superior to some value (currently an arbitrary value of 1 meter) then the method runs one more loop to try reducing the difference. Also to optimize the algorithm, some components (like the Water Interaction component) update the undeformed position with the velocity regardless of the wave in Fixed Update (waves are computed only in Update to reduce overhead). This algorithm is implemented in C# for the physic and also in VFX graph to compute when the particles precisely hit the water. You can reuse this algorithm for your own VFX graph, for example rain particles that generate splashes when hitting the water. So if you use the API to get the water height, velocity and normal, you need an internal Vector3 variable to save the undeformed position and pass it as reference to the method Ocean.GetWaterHeight , this method will then update the variable so the next frame it will be closer to the actual water height. To initialize the undeformed position, set it at start to the world position of the object. Also when using the Ocean API, you need to save some of the results that are shared between GetWaterHeight , GetWaterVelocity and GetWaterNormal . This makes the use of the API not intuitive, but it is required to get enough performance. Computing the waves on the CPU can take quite some time as it is done a lot of time per frame. Water velocity and normal Computing the water velocity is very important as many effects depend on the relative velocity of the object onto the water (dynamic pressure, particles generation and audio), and waves create water velocity. To compute it, the wave deformation is computed once more at the undeformed position, but at a different time. The difference is divided by the delta time and results in the water velocity. This velocity is then attenuated with the depth to try simulating the real world wave attenuation (water doesn't move much under two times the wavelength in depth). Because the velocity is computed not knowing which wavelength is present at the undeformed position, an equivalent wavelength is deduced using the water velocity itself and the dispersion relation (the formula that defines the wave speed function of the wavelength). The depth is compared with this equivalent wavelength to make the attenuation factor.

[PAGE 34] To compute the water normal, which can be needed in some special case where a low number of water sampling if performed (Sphere Water Interaction component for example use the water normal), the wave deformation is computed 2 time more at different location, then the the normal vector is computed with the 3 know water position. Computing the wave deformation being quite resourceful, getting the water velocity and especially the water normal lead to an CPU overhead. See the performance section of this document to know what features are planned to be added to optimize the computation of these vectors. Breaking waves force Not only Storm Breakers includes an innovant particle system and procedural audio for the breaking waves, it also computes the additional speed of the water being thrown at the crest and the torque it creates. The breaking additional speed is computed using a similar value to the one triggering the particle generation and audio (compression), but a bit different to try propagating the extra speed further than the crest. This speed is proportional to the wave celerity, each system adds its own breaking speed at a given point. Its value is zero when there is no breaking at this point. This additional breaking speed can push small watercraft in the breaking wave, or create larger sea foam bursts when a wave hits a ship. Then there is a breaking wave torque that is computed using the additional breaking speed. The direction of the torque is the one of the vortex that would be generated by the lip of the breaker, meaning perpendicular to the wave and rolling in the wave. This torque makes small watercrafts roll in the breakers, making them more dangerous. Currently the breaking wave torque is only implemented in the Water Interaction component. The torque is computed when reading the water speed for each triangle, then it is multiplied by the triangle area and added to the rigidbody. It is activated a bit above water (arbitrary 0.02 times the breaking wavelength in height) to simulate the thickness of the sea foam turmoils. The torque is attenuated with the depth by the same factor that attenuates the water velocity. The breaking torque can be visualized in magenta in the Gizmo mode. You can change the intensity of the torque force and additional breaking speed in the Ocean Controller component. So for a storm survival gameplay you would make strong waves that really need to be avoided, while for a more casual game or any simulation not focused on the waves you may reduce it or even remove it by setting their value to zero. When the waves arrive near the shoreline, the breaking speed is increased to simulate the shore breaking.

[PAGE 35] Buoyancy physics Storm Breakers provides the buoyancy effect so you can make objects float in the waves. Here is a description on how it works. Physics computation The way the buoyancy is computed is by calculating the water pressure acting on each triangles of a simulated mesh. The pressure comes from both the gravitation (called here static pressure) and the relative velocity (called here dynamic pressure). The pressure on each triangle makes an Unity force that acts on the rigidbody, the forces are normal with their triangle and not vertical. The numerical values of the force are in the International System unit (meter, kilogram, second) following scientific formulas. The static pressure is proportional to the water density (1000kg/m3) depth and gravity (10m/s²), while the dynamic pressure is proportional to the square of the normal velocity of the triangle relative to the water, the half water density and the drag coefficient. The pressures are summed by keeping only positive values (fluid cannot make negative pressure on a surface), and then transformed to a force by multiplying with the triangle area and directed in its normal. The force applies in the middle of the triangle. In red the static pressure forces, in blue the dynamic pressure forces. The fact that the forces are not vertical can be non intuitive, but it’s the most realistic way to code buoyancy. This is also how surfing physics happens. Yet on some very calm water it can lead to an issue : since some triangles can be nearly inside water while others are nearly outside, there might be a small asymmetry in the forces, making the object moving by itself. To solve this, the water interaction component provides a way to keep only the vertical components of the forces.

[PAGE 36] Orient the force vertically only in flat waters and non moving watercraft. The forces ares computed in fixed update as it is recommended by Unity, but the water computation is done in update being more expansive (Fixed update can be called many time per frame if the previous frame was long, leading to an even longer frame and so the next fixed update will be called again many time. It is better to leave the minimum in this function to avoid having spikes of CPU overhead). Wake wave Storm Breakers physics provide a simplified yet very useful approximation of the wake wave, that is the wave generated by the object moving in the water. This wake wave is virtual and cannot be seen on the water surface because of the way Storm Breakers is coded. Its forces on the object are computed though, and it provides an advanced simulation feature to simulate cornering and surfing attitude. The way it is coded is by increasing or decreasing the water depth to the height of a wave moving at the relative speed of the triangle to the water. When the relative speed moves toward the exterior or the triangle, depth is increased and the triangle might get virtually submerged where it shouldn't. Conversely the depth is diminished when the relative speed moves away from the triangle exterior and the triangle might emerge where it shouldn’t. The increase or decrease of depth also changes the static pressure acting on the triangle which in turn changes the maximal limit of the dynamic pressure, making this effect even more impactful. In the flowing screenshot the wake wave is disabled, more static pressure acts on the upward side of the hull due to the slope of the wave. This will make the speedboat align to the slope of the wave and then slide down. No wake wave here.

[PAGE 37] In this same screenshot, the wake wave simulation is activated. Note how the forces on the upper side decrease while the ones on the lower side increase. This is because sliding down a bit the slope will generate a wave on the lower side and a trough on the upper side.This will lean the speedboat in the slope and generate a side force strong enough to maintain it in its trajectory : this is realistic surfing mechanics ! Wake wave activated. The same thing happens when cornering. In this first screenshot the wake wave is deactivated and the speedboat overturns : No wake wave. In this screenshot the wake wave is activated and the speedboat makes a better curve : Wake wave activated.

[PAGE 38] Simulated mesh The buoyancy requires the use of a simplified mesh to be simulated. Having too many triangles in the simulated mesh will lead to an overhead by excessive computing of the ocean and applying a lot of Unity forces. This simplified mesh can be the one used with the mesh collider. For boats and ships, Storm Breakers provides a tool to procedurally generate the simulated mesh so you can tweak the number of triangles as well as other things. A visualization of the simulated mesh with the hull generator helper. Note how it envelops the railing to generate the particles when it hits the water here. The simulated mesh doesn’t need to accurately shape the objects it simulates . It is actually recommended to take a bit of liberty to have more control on the buoyancy dynamic (see next section). There is a limit to this, the particles are also generated according to the triangle position, so you cannot make too much change. A simulated mesh with more depth is a way to reduce rocking while keeping good particle positioning. For the Water Interaction component, all the triangles of the simulated mesh will generate static and dynamic pressure while underwater. You cannot currently segregate some triangles not to generate static pressure like you would for the railing of a boat. For this reason it is recommended to envelop the railing with the simulated mesh to generate the particles and dynamic pressure when hitting a wave. The issue is when capsizing, because the mesh needs to be convex there must be triangles joining the

[PAGE 39] simulated railing, and those triangles will make a buoyancy force where there are no actual surfaces to do so, so the capsized boat will float too high. There are currently no fixes for this, but might be improved in future updates. In the Water Interaction component, the simulated mesh shouldn’t need to be convex for the Storm Breakers engine to work. Yet because it is currently linked to the collider mesh that needs to be convex so the rigidbody can compute the inertia and use it as a collider, it is eventually quite mandatory to have a convex mesh. This is much a constraint as every ray from vertex to vertex should be within the mesh, limiting many kinds of shape. Special buoyancy Storm Breakers does not yet provide an efficient way to simulate very low poly meshes (like the built-in cube with its 12 triangles), nor flat meshes (like a surfboard) nor linear objects (which could be useful to make the buoyancy of a character’s rig). If you have such a need in your game, you should currently use a complex mesh that closely shapes the object. Such features might be added in future updates though.

[PAGE 40] Watercraft dynamic The physics in Storm Breakers is coded to be as realistic as possible and you may wonder how to tweak the behavior of your watercraft. There is no explicit tweak but rather a possibility to use real world phenomena to adjust the waterfract behavior to anything you want. Watercraft stability and sensitivity When speaking about stability, there are in reality 2 different things to consider : - The stability limit is the maximal tilt angle from which the watercraft can recover its initial position. - The sensitivity is the response time to which the watercraft will recover its initial position after being tilted. Because a watercraft will always tend to align itself to the slope caused by the waves, the sensitivity plays an important role : it defines how fast the watercraft will align to the wave. If it is slow enough it might not even be impacted by small waves, but with high sensitivity the watercraft will rock a lot into high stepped waves. So in this document we speak about the wave sensitivity as a flaw . Note : In naval terms we rather speak about primary stability and secondary stability, which are respectively the stability at low and high list angle. In this document we speak differently by talking about the wave sensitivity because for a game where we want to see impressive waves, too much realism in such a sea state would lead to too much seasickness for the player. So it’s important to know how to tweak the watercraft wave sensitivity. Roll dynamic To adjust both the roll stability limit and the roll sensitivity, you can play on the mass repartition, the hull cross section geometry and add some components. Here is a description on what each variable can change the behavior of your watercraft. Center of gravity The first variable you might think about is the center of gravity. You might think that lowering it will increase the roll stability but lowering too much the gravity center also increases the roll wave sensitivity which makes your watercraft rocks more under the wave ! (and so looking less stable). The position of the center of gravity has a lot of impact and shouldn’t be set too far high or down. As a general rule, what matters in terms of stability and wave sensitivity is the speed at which the watercraft returns to its original angle : set the gravity center height so the watercraft returns reasonably slowly to its initial position (a second or so depending on the watercraft size).

[PAGE 41] Tilt the watercraft and increase the gravity center until it right itself reasonably slow. Though, this rule cannot be applied to sailboats. With the external force coming from the wind on the sails, the center of gravity needs to be set very low to avoid too much list. But sailboats have a keel, which is another way to solve the issue described below. Inertia and density Inertia plays an important role as well. By increasing the rotational inertia or the density, the watercraft will return more slowly to its original angle and so the inertia center can be set lower to increase the stability limit without impacting the wave sensitivity. In the Water Interaction component you can tweak the roll inertia tensor to use this tweak. This can work until some point where it becomes visually unrealistic in some situation, so use this with moderation. One other way is to increase the hull depth, you’ll need to increase the density too (and the controller forces and perhaps the gravity center height) and you’ll have a less wave-sensitive watercraft. Increasing the depth of the hull reduces the wave sensitivity a lot. Hull geometry The hull geometry, in combination with the gravity center height, plays a very important role in the watercraft stability. If we consider the the sensitivity at low list angle, then this diagram shows how to setup the gravity center depending on the hull geometry :

[PAGE 42] If we consider the stability limit, then this other diagram shows how to choose the hull shape whether you want your watercraft to capsize at low angle or not. Note : As you can see, the V shaped hull would be in theory the most seaworthy one. While this is indeed the case in Storm Breakers, in reality the V shaped hull has more drag than the round one, and also it requires a lower gravity center which in return needs to increase the watercraft weight to offset the hull weight. So in reality the V shaped hull is much less performant, but in Storm Breakers you don’t need to be limited to such things and the V shaped hull is a good choice. If the mechanics of your game makes the watercraft capsize on a player mistake (for example when trying to survive in a storm), then you should try to narrow the hull and choose the correct shape : a square shape will make the watercraft abruptly capsize which leave few opportunity for the player to recover a large heeling, a more round shape will progressively lose in sensitivity so the player can anticipate before it's too late to recover.

[PAGE 43] Water fins One very useful way to reduce the roll of a watercraft is to add stabilizers on the hulls, just like many real watercraft do (sailboats keels act also as rool stabilizer in addition to prevent drifting) : Credit : wikipedia They make drag forces that oppose the roll movement, thus reducing the effective sensitivity without any impact on the stability limit. You can easily simulate them by adding a quad on the edge or bottom of the hull with the Storm Breakers Foil component attached too. The lift coefficient will greatly increase the effectiveness of those features with the speed increasing. In the sailing example, an invisible triangle with the Foil component acts as roll stabilizer in addition to reducing drift. Pitch dynamic When speaking about a ship or a boat, the length in general greatly exceeds the width and the hull depth is almost constant along the length. And while a hull can reduce its roll sensitivity with its cross section

[PAGE 44] shape, the pitch stability cannot be much modified and lead to a high pitch sensitivity into the waves. This is why pitching of boat and ship is in general more visible than roll and it is the same in Storm Breakers. But with a long length the pitch inertia is high and the pitching is in general slow enough not to reach high-frequency causing seasickness (see Gameplay overview section of this document for more info about seasickness). Still, there are things to consider for the pitch dynamic. First the inertia factor in this axis can be adjusted in the Water Interaction component, but you shouldn't increase this much higher to 1 (which results in the inertia of a full body in its length) or you will see non-natural pitching. Even with masts or high buildings not computed in the inertia by the rigidbody, it’s rare that such features actually increase the whole inertia because they are quite light compared to the pitch inertia of the hull itself. The bow shape plays an important role when hitting big waves. An enlarging bow will create a lot of reserve buoyancy and makes the ship bounce on the wave, leading to high pitching. To be noted that high pitching in the waves slows down the watercraft considerably, and sometimes with insufficient speed the watercraft can surf backward in a big wave so it’s better to have a narrow bow to prevent this. With an enlarging bow, a lot of buoyancy is generated forward when hitting large waves. With a narrower bow there is less reserve buoyancy and the ship pitches less.

[PAGE 45] Note : in real world hull design, the bow is often shaped with enlargements so as to reduce the water coming on the deck when hitting a wave, but this isn’t much of an issue in a game. So again you rather change the simulated mesh to make a narrow bow that prevents surfing backward in a wave. High speed dynamic Storm Breakers allows you to simulate high speed watercraft. The Epic Surfing scene example shows you how this can be achieved. Planing At high speed the dynamic pressure becomes more important than the static pressure and phenomena happen. First the hull will have a tendency to generate a lift with the increasing dynamic pressure when the equilibrium of forces make the bottom of the hull have a positive incidence angle. This is called planing and all the real-world speedboats rely on it to move faster. This also happens in Storm Breakers though this doesn't affect the speed much because the drag forces are already lower than they should be at low speed (the wake wave is not completely simulated). Note how the dynamic pressure (blue lines) rise up the speedboat. Cornering and surfing The difficulty in cornering is to push the watercraft inward the curve. If there is no such force, then the watercraft will overturn and lose all its speed, making cornering impossible. With the rudder set at the bottom aft, the force it will generate will make a steering moment and a leaning moment in the correct way, but this force won’t help to create the required inward force (It actually goes

[PAGE 46] against it, this is why in a car the steering wheels are in the front and not the back). So how do real speedboats corner ? They rely on the wake wave they generate when setting the hull across the trajectory. See the following diagram that explains this physics. Note how the V shaped hull matches with the wake trough and the wake wave : on one side there is almost no more pressure while on the other the pressure builds up a lot in an almost horizontal direction. The large dissymmetry in lateral pressure makes the net force that pushes the watercraft inward the curve, making a curved trajectory without losing much speed. The wake elevation and trough also create a leaning torque that maintains the watercraft leaning in the curve. If there wasn’t the wake wave the waterfract would tend to lean outside the curve because the pressure acting lower than the gravity center, which would reduce the cornering attitude. For the surfing mechanic the same effect happens and allows one to ride across a wave. The hull (or board) is set across the trajectory either by a controlled force (rudder, surfer) or naturally with the slope making the waterfact sliding down the slope. Then the wake wave builds up on the lower side while a trough is created on the upper side, making a net force that prevents sliding down too fast and staying longer in the wave. The effects of the wake wave can be simulated in Storm Breakers allowing for cornering and surfing mechanics. The shape of the hull is very important for cornering and surfing and only a V-shaped hull will be performant enough to do so. The narrower or deeper the hull is, the more efficient it will be at cornering and surfing (this requires a lower gravity center but it can easily be modified). A flat hull like a surfing board can corner and surf only with a high additional leaning torque that maintains the lean, more than a classic rudder force would do. Indeed such a hull is not naturally stable in a curve, for a surfboard this comes from the weight of the surfer leaning on the board.

[PAGE 47] The pressure acting on the speedboat while surfing. Note the lateral asymmetry. The pressure acting on the speedboat while cornering. Note the lateral asymmetry. Trajectory stability When navigating fast, we like to keep the course steady and not overturning at any mistake. For that we can do that with a fin set at the aft (a simple mesh with the foil component attached to), with a gravity center set more forward (and not aft as we may expect) or/and with a hull that is deeper aft than forward. All those effects will make sure there is more dynamic pressure behind the gravity center when the hull is across its trajectory, making an aligning torque. A simulated hull deeper aft, an aft fin with the foil component (also acting as a rudder) and a gravity center set a bit forward, all to improve trajectory stability.

[PAGE 48] Recap Now you know all the parameters you can play with to adjust all the way you want a watercraft dynamic. Here is a brief recap by using possible desired watercraft dynamics as example : ● Low seasickness, no capsizing : ○ Prefer round shaped or V shaped hull for high stability limit ○ Moderately low gravity center for some stability limit and not too much sensitivity. ○ A large keel fin to reduce roll ○ Inertia increased a bit to slow down roll and pitch ○ Narrow bow to reduce pitching. ● Fast watercraft : ○ V shaped hull required ○ A foil/rudder behind to stabilize the trajectory ○ Low density to corner better ○ Small size to keep some response time ● Capsizing under big waves only ○ Round shaped hull to avoid brutal capsize. ○ Low width to height ratio to foster capsizing. ○ Low sensitivity with a fairly high gravity center, just enough to have a bit of stability on flat water. ○ Enlarging bow to push backward the hull and foster capsize. Now you see how important the hull shape is, this is why it is recommended to generate the simulated mesh using the hull generator. With this component you will easily change the shape hull even if it doesn't fit much with the 3D model, and you can tweak many dynamic behaviors of your watercraft. The speedboat in the Surfing Giant Wave example scene is a good example on how the simulated hull has been modified against the 3D model to improve cornering and surfing attitude. Also keep in mind that some ship or boat 3D models don’t have a correctly shaped hull and they might not be naturally seaworthy.

[PAGE 49] Wind In Storm Breakers, the wind is part of the simulation. It affects mainly the visual effects and the water surface, but it can also affect the physics : the Foil component can act as a sail with sufficient mesh area, the Water Interaction component can also make the object drift with the wind force if asked so. In the sailing example the boat is actually powered and heeled by the wind (blue lines), note how the keel prevents drifting. Wind implementation Currently the wind evolves with the height to simulate the boundary layer effect. Some simple turbulences are also implemented, future updates might make the turbulences affect the water surface to improve the sea rendering. The wind can be set up with the wind controller object, if not present the default values will be taken. Currently the wind doesn't affect the waves, but only the ripples. Depending on the user feedback, future updates might include an advanced wind/ocean controller that will automatically set the waves properties realistically according to the wind and its evolution. Sailing As explained it is possible to simulate sailing using the Storm Breakers package feature. Yet, because this is still under development, this document doesn’t provide yet more info on how to correctly set up a good sailing simulation and you may have to wait for more features before making a sailing game using solely Storm Breakers.

[PAGE 50] Rendering overview The rendering in Storm Breakers is designed to be as realistic as possible while keeping good performance. Future updates might increase the global definition to better render the ocean and the effects. Water rendering Here is briefly described how the water is rendered. Waves The rendering of the waves is 100% done in the graphic process unit (GPU) through a vertex shader, this vertex shader having the exact same math as the one used in the CPU to compute the physics. The normals and many effects are computed per vertex to reduce the overhead in the pixel stage. Ripples To improve the water surface, a ripple system is rendered in pixel stage using 2 normal maps moving in opposite directions at different speeds. The normal map used come from this link : https://blenderartists.org/t/animated-water-normal-map-tileable-looped/673140 The ripples are erased on the back of a breaking wave to simulate the wave superiority as explained in the wave model overview section of this document, but this effect is not direction-dependent (future

[PAGE 51] update might try to include this feature). This makes a smooth water surface like we can see behind real breakers, this also helps break the monotony of the water surface. Relying on a normal map to render strong ripples isn’t good because we see as much the front of the ripples and their back that should be occluded by the front. To try to reduce this issue, the current ocean shader attenuates the ripples’ normals when they get at too much grazing angle. Future updates might include a thinner water mesh and more small wave layer to improve the rendering of the water details. Also parallax mapping of the normal texture might be considered. Reflections The water reflections are done using the built-in Fresnel effect of the shader graph PBR master. By default the water reflects the skybox only, but Storm Breakers provide an approximate way to reflect dynamic objects without using the Screen Space Reflection (not available in URP). To do this, a dynamic reflection probe is set at a mirror position of the camera relative to the sea level. This reflection probe captures most of the scene (except the water) at runtime and generates a cubemap texture that is automatically used to compute the reflection. Using a reflection probe instead of SSR can make a bit of improvement on the water reflection because some geometries become visible, but mainly some defaults. First it’s quite expensive for the GPU as it acts as a second camera rendering most of the scene, to solve this you should reduce its resolution and how frequently it is updated, but you’ll have much less quality. Secondly it’s not accurate enough in the waves, this is why there is a tweak factor to reduce the reflections angle. Though, on a glassy water and with a good hardware it is possible to render nice reflections :

[PAGE 52] When there are more waves, the approximation of this technique makes reflection behind the object (the ones we can see between the sails in the following screenshot), which is of course wrong. To offset this a bit, the reflection probe automatically increases its depth to reduce the reflection behind, but this also reduces the correct reflection so it’s not perfect. Future updates of Storm Breakers might upgrade the package to the High Definition Render Pipeline, then the screen space reflection will be available and most of the issues using a reflection probe will be solved.

[PAGE 53] Horizon The provided mesh that renders the ocean has a reduced triangle density at the horizon to reduce the number of vertices computed. To offset the lower density, Storm Breakers replaces at the horizon the wave from its model by a different wave’s normals computed in pixel stage. Those waves are called fake horizon waves because they don’t precisely match with the real ones of the model. Currently the fake waves are computed by a single non-moving perlin noise. The trick is using the pixel's rapid world position change as a way to animate the fake wave. With high screen resolution and slow camera movement, this effect can be insufficient though. Future updates will try to improve this effect based on user experience. The intensity of the fake horizon wave is automatically set to the maximum intensity of the wave systems, but sometime this is not relevant (for example in the scene surfing giant waves, the maximum intensity of the wave systems is very high because of the large breakers, but at the horizon we want to see the background waves with low intensity), so you can tweak their intensity with a value in the ocean material inspector. SubSurface scattering Subsurface scattering is the effect of the water being lit by transparency. Storm Breakers provides an approximation of this effect in the waves : when the wave gets sharp, at the crest the material emits a bit of light corresponding to the water being lit. You can tweak the intensity of this effect through the ocean material inspector. High value can lead to surrealist rendering. Ground color scattering When including a terrain in the simulation, the base color of the water is affected by the ground function of the depth. The shallower the water is, the more it gets the ground color as it becomes the main source of light.

[PAGE 54] Currently the ground color is only one solid color field in the Ocean material inspector, so it can’t render a sea bed made of different colors (sans and rocks for example). Future updates might make the material read the actual terrain color to improve this effect. Transparency In deep water it’s hard to see through the water because almost no light comes from below to lit underwater surfaces. Still, the Storm Breakers package provides transparency for the water to make smoother water rendering. There are big issues with water transparency and particle transparency though : ● Since VFX graph particles have trouble being ordered, breakers' sea foam burst can’t be transparent and so they must be drawn before the water in the opaque queue, and so we can see them through a transparent water. To prevent this you must set the water to opaque by setting its minimal transparency to 1 in the material inspector when there are breakers VFX in the scene. ● The soft particles used to render sea spray don’t work on the water because its scene depth cannot be read being rendered in the transparent queue. There is no fix for this.

[PAGE 55] The issues with water transparency Underwater rendering Storm Breakers provide a very basic underwater effect in case the camera would go underwater (works only in play mode). You shouldn't rely much on it to render realistic underwater scenes. This effect does not segregate precisely the pixels in the screen that are actually underwater and the ones that are not, it’s a global fog effect that activates as soon as the camera is near the water surface or below. This will be improved over future updates but precise segregation is still out of reach. The rendering of the water surface from below is currently not physically based. It’s a trick based on the surface smoothness with which we can see the sky color at normal angle and the water color at grazing angle to simulate the Fresnel effect. All the particles but the sea foam bursts from the breaking wave are culled underwater.

[PAGE 56] Water clipping Clip the water inside a boat using one of the mask materials on a quad. Storm Breakers package provides a material to mask the water (water&ParticlesMask.mat) This is very handy for keeping open boats exempt of water. Though, high crest waves might go above this mask from time to time and there is currently no fix for this. Currently the implementation of this mask is a simple fully transparent shader graph writing in the depth buffer and rendered before the water. The problem is when there are gunports on the hull, nothing will be drawn afterwhile within those openings (not even the skybox), leaving an unset color. Future updates will try to fix this issue by writing a more advanced shader that checks the scene depth before writing its own. The mask must be fully inside the object you want the water to be clipped (meaning not above the railing for a boat) so as not to have the water wrongly clipped when seeing from a side view. The mask material that clips the water also clips the particles. So as a general rule it is good to make a flat water/particle mask that enclose the railing of a boat. To build the mesh quickly you can use Probuilder. This deck mask was built with Probuilder.

[PAGE 57] Visual effect rendering Fake lighting Most of the visual effects on the scene are fake lit by multiplying their color to the sum of the ambient color and the halved main light color (Halving the directional light color is the result of a tweaking). The reason is twofold : since those particles render small drops of water, the texture’s normal doesn't fit to this geometry and we wouldn’t want their color on screen to be affected from where we look at them. Secondly this greatly reduces the pixel stage GPU overhead when drawing large amounts of particles on the screen, which turned out to be a major bottleneck. Using fake lighting makes the particle not affected by scene shadows though. In this screenshot with exaggerated lighting, the sea foam bursts are fake lit while the sea foam floats are not. Making the sum of the halved directional light and ambient light is an approximation that can lead to different brightness with the floating particles in dark scenes. Also attempts on getting the ambient light color using skybox ambient mode failed, this is why the ambient mode must be currently set to either color or gradient . This addition is done in the Ocean Controller component (it acts as a general controller). To update the fake lighting in the scene you should trigger its start function by clicking on Click Here To Refresh :

[PAGE 58] Another drawback of the fake lighting is that it’s more difficult to simulate light occlusion within a large burst of sea foam. Currently the color of the sea foam burst is darkened a bit at spawn and quickly returns to white in an attempt to fake the light occlusion. This effect will try to be improved over the future updates. Transparency and sorting Using many transparent particles lead to a problem of sorting them at draw to correctly have the nearest one on top of the farest one. The VFX graph package includes a way to sort them but it turned out not to be working properly. So it has been decided to set the sea foam burst from the breakers to the opaque queue and have them properly sorted. The drawback is that the water is rendered after (being transparent) and makes transparency on those particles. Floating particles Large amounts of various floating particles coming from the waves, the splashes and the propeller. The floating sea foam and swirls are not rendered through the ocean surface but through particles that use the same vertex shader as the ocean. Here is the main reason why it is almost impossible to render wake waves on the ocean: while we could deform the ocean mesh by CPU script, these particles would

[PAGE 59] not be affected by such modification, and it’s impossible to code an unbounded number of additional wave in GPU because of its limitations (no loop, no conditional computing, etc). Future updates might improve the rendering of floating particles using normal mapping. Particles clipping Storm breakers package provides a way to clip particles the same way it is done with the water clipping using a depth mask material (particlesMask.mat). A quad set in front of the scene to clip the splashes particles. The cliping of the breaker’s sea foam burst is not currently possible. Because of the way it is currently implemented, the water interaction component makes splashes particles appear sometimes through the deck of a boat, which can be very annoying. When this happens, you should first try to tweak the particle system (more outward speed) as explained in the visual effect overview section of this document. If the spot where this happens is localized, you may use the kill box provided by the particle system, but this is sometimes not enough to clip large particles (with the kill box, the entire particle is removed only when its origin penetrates the box). Then you may rely on masks, meaning invisible mesh with the masking material. When this happens, try tweaking particles properties or use a mask. The difficulty with masks is that they don’t act as volume and they clip everything behind. The trick for this issue is to make a pyramidal mesh that links the edges of the volume we want the particles to be clipped to the camera. This clips all the particles below this pyramid.

[PAGE 60] The pyramidal particles mask concept explained. Overdraw Overdraw visualized in a stormy scene. Because there can be many transparent particles rendered in the scene (especially in stormy scenes), overdraw is known to be a main bottleneck in the Storm Breakers package. The GPU overhead happens for the pixel stage when drawing particles, so the solution is to have fewer pixels affected by particles on the screen : lowering the resolution, reducing the particles quantity or simply bringing the camera further back. Future updates will try to reduce this issue by splitting the water interaction bursts to smaller particles and reduce their amount of pixels drawn.

[PAGE 61] Post processing effects Attempts on setting up post processing effects (such as HDR tone mapping) during developments were unfruitful. Notably what happened in HDR mode is the transparent material having a darker tint that they should have. So if you want to use post processing effects in your project, you may have to use your own graphic skills to make them work properly. Mobile platform Storm Breakers is not designed to run on mobile platforms. The main issue is the VFX being computed by the GPU, this requires a compute capable graphic processing unit and very few mobile phones have this. High Definition Render Pipeline (HDRP) Currently Storm Breakers is developed for the Unity Universal Render Pipeline (URP) for a better versatility. Though there aren’t many pipeline-specific features used and the upgrade is planned to be done in future updates. With the HDRP some features will be available and will increase the package quality : screen space reflection, floating origin, and perhaps more. When upgrading to HRDP, it is likely that there will be a new package sold separately from the URP package. The philosophy might be different by increasing the number of wave systems rendered,thinner mesh density and more particles so as to match the high definition expectation and high end hardware capacities.

[PAGE 62] Visual effect overview Storm Breakers package includes a whole water visual effect stack for improved visuals. A large ship hitting a big wave and making a lot of visual effects. VFX graph In Storm Breakers, all the visual effects were developed with the Unity VFX graph package. This package makes the computation of the particles run on the GPU instead of the CPU, which greatly improves their performances and allows scenes with high visual effects. Though, this works only on GPU compute capable hardware, and so most mobiles won’t be able to render the particles. The VFX graph package is also a graphic coding way which greatly eased the visual effects development. The graphs are accessible and commented, so you can benefit from this easiness by customizing yourself the graphs and making them suit your project (personal use only). The water interaction visual effect graph.

[PAGE 63] Many properties are exposed in the inspector of each particle system, yet there could be even more and some already-tweaked value lies in the graph. Don’t hesitate to take a look at these graphs (after reading this section to understand how they work) and modify the graph according to your project’s needs. Realistic and scalable particles All the water particles systems were developed considering physics phenomena. So their speed, size, rendering, and many other attributes evolve in the most realistic way. But most importantly, the particle's behavior scales well to any size they simulate. So without changing much the properties, you can simulate with a single VFX template both large scale objects as well as small ones. Type of particles In Storm Breakers there are 3 major kinds of particles : ● Sea foam burst : They represent the sea foam projected in the air because of water hitting a surface. They happen when a wave breaks and when an object hits the water with sufficient velocity. The wind takes them away a bit. Physically they are drops of water foam of large size. ● Sea foam floats : They represent the sea foam floating on the water, generally a result of the airborne sea foam falling down the surface. ● Sea spray : They represent loose water being atomized by the wind blowing. They happen when the wind is strong enough and when the water is considered loose : at the crest of the waves or during a splash. The wind takes them away. Physically they are very thin drops of water The boat controller VFX also includes the rendering of swirls that would be generated by the propeller spinning; this kind of particle is quite similar to the sea foam floats. Ocean visual effects In this screenshot we can see the sea foam bursts, the sea foam floats and the sea sprays. In Storm Breakers, the way the breakers are simulated is mainly through the visual effect, here is briefly described how the particle system works. Note : this particle system is not synchronized with the ocean material in the editor . This will be fixed as soon as Unity provides a way to synchronize both. If it’s too annoying in the editor, you may deactivate them temporarily.

[PAGE 64] Primary and secondary grid To generate many particles on the ocean surface, this particle system relies on a two level grid. On the so-called primary grid, invisible particles read the sea state at their position. When a primary trigger is reached, the invisible particles generate a number of other particles around them, these new particles in turn read the sea state at their position and become alive or dead function of a secondary trigger, the alive ones will then render either seam foam burst or sea spray. This way many particles can be precisely generated by keeping a good GPU process time. Though, sometimes the primary grid is too rough to detect small waves and there can be moments with a lack of particles on these waves. In the primary grid, the invisible particles are regularly disposed inside the VFX bounds. They move with the ocean gameobject to stay in the camera focus. You can change the bounds of this grid to optimize the performance or conversely increase the width of the visual effects (in that case you might need to increase the system capacity). The number of particles in this grid is a function of the primary step as defined in the VFX inspector. The primary grid particles visualized with textures. The secondary grid is generated within a square shape that matches with the primary grid, the particles are randomly positioned within this space. The number of particles in this grid is a function of the primary step, the secondary step and also the size of the breaking wave causing the trigger (the wave size is traced back with the breaking speed that is a by-result of the trigger computation). The particles of the secondary grid before the secondary trigger is read.

[PAGE 65] The setup of the grids works with many kinds of sea state. If it doesn’t work well because you are making a special kind of sea state, then you may have to modify their properties but before a solid understanding on how the whole system works is required. Sea foam bursts The sea foam bursts represent the burst caused by the lip hitting the wave surface. Compression trigger The sea foam bursts are triggered by a physical value that is believed to be the real world trigger of the wave breaking : the compression (Some would says that the slope is the trigger: above 30° the wave breaks the same ways a sand pile would collapse when too steep, but further observation showed that a wave breaks regardless of the slope it lies on.) The compression is how much the water is horizontally squeezed, the derivative of the horizontal deformation in more mathematical terms. Note : in reality the horizontal compression is actually the cause of the waves rising up and down because of water’s incompressibility. The compression can be visualized with the mesh density seen from above. 2 vertices brought to the same point means a compression of 1. To be realistic, the compression should be computed by adding the derivatives of each system’s horizontal deformation. This would make the large waves break the smaller one on their crest like it does in reality. But issues arised doing such an addition, so currently there is no addition of each wave system’s compression, they break independently of each other. This makes quite some wrong breaking, especially in the trough of a wave no other waves could break because of the negative compression lying here. Future updates might try to improve this, but only seasoned eyes should spot the wrong breakers.

[PAGE 66] The default compression limit at which the sea foam burst appears - the secondary trigger - is 0.85. (An horizontal compression of 1 would lead in physics to an infinite wave height so this value is way higher than the one that happens in reality, this is because the horizontal deformation of the wave has been increased to make a natural tessellation as explained in the Wave model overview in this document.) This limit happens as soon a wave reaches the same intensity. So this happens a bit before the wave height is clamped so as to simulate the ripples triggering the breaking and the wind blowing off the crest. (This effect might be improved in future updates so as to actually take account the wind strength.) Increasing this value makes the waves break less longer, which can be an effective way to reduce overdraw but making a less rough sea. In the primary grid a very low value is taken so as to avoid missing small breaking waves that could lie between the grid reads. When the waves arrive near the shoreline, the compression trigger is increased by the same amount as the wave height is reduced, making them visually break. Many effects are missing to properly render realistic shore breakers (celerity and group speed, peaked wave with long trough, lip projection, etc), but this is currently not the aim of Storm Breakers package that focuses on deep water. Hit point When the secondary trigger is reached, a particle from the secondary grid is set alive and its position is changed. This new position is not exactly the one the waves would lead to, the hit point is taken in account. The hit point is the position from the crest at which the virtual lip would hit the surface. It is computed somewhat to a parabolic trajectory versus a plane equation. The speed of this parabolic trajectory is linked to the size of the wave and the compression so as to be realistic. Thanks to that, large breaking waves make foam over a distance that simulates real breakers nicely.

[PAGE 67] When several waves are breaking at the same spot, the hit point positions are summed. Speed Making just a positioning with the hit point wouldn't be sufficient for the particles to stay along with the wave during its lifetime, a speed must be printed to it. In the graph you will find this speed as break speed (although it’s not exactly the speed at which the lip would be spilled) and it is computed as proportional to the wave speed with a bit of vertical component. Like the hit point, the wave system's break speed adds to each other when several waves break at the same position. This adds naturally some realistic randomness in the burst. Size The size of the particles when spawned is linked to the density of the secondary grid so as to avoid lack of particles. Some randomness is added to break visible patterns. Then the particles grow as a function of the wave size. When growing, the texture is stretched. Rendering The sea foam bursts are rendered with a texture that has been procedurally generated. A darkening has been drawn in the middle of the texture to try to simulate the light occlusion happening in the middle of the burst. This effect is further simulated with a full texture darkening function of the lifetime of the particles. So when a new particle is spawned, it is assumed to be within the bulks of particles so it should be occluded from the light, and when growing it is assumed to get on top of the particles bulks so its color become the one from the lighting (sum of the halved directional light and ambient light as explained in the VFX rendering section this section). Lifetime The lifetime is computed as a function of the speed and vertical acceleration in an attempt to predict when the particle will go under the surface without computing the collision. When the particles die, it creates the sea foam floats. Sea foam floats The sea foam floats particles represent the sea foam that floats on the water in the turmoils of a breaking wave.

[PAGE 68] Lifetime These particles are spawned by the sea foam bursts when they die. They are being given the undeformed position that has been computed roughly by the burst and a size proportional to their. Then the lifetime is a function of the size so as to make the floats of large waves lasting longer than the smaller ones. Rendering The particles are randomly oriented. This plus the random size and random position coming from the burst, this makes a highly randomized pattern. The particles are rendered using the same vertex shader as the ocean and a procedurally generated texture with an alpha clip function of the lifetime to disappear by leaving a thinner float . It is to be noted that something important is missing in rendering the breaker’s floats : there is no directioning. In reality a wave about to break should leave long strings of floats. Future updates will try to render this effect. Sea spray The sea spray represents the loose water being atomized by the wind.

[PAGE 69] Lifetime Sea sprays are spawned using the primary and secondary grid system. The trigger is a function of the local wind compared to a minimal wind trigger, and how sharp the wave is (computed somehow like the compression but also including the wave effective height). Because the secondary grid is too dense, a sort of probability act to reduce the number of particles generated. The velocity of the particles is the local wind inclined to a 30° slope so as to simulate the wind acceleration at the crest of the waves. Then all the others properties are user defined (lifetime, size and growth rate, transparency) Rendering These particles are rendered using a simple transparent texture colored by the lighting.

[PAGE 70] Water interaction visual effects Storm Breakers package includes a physically based particle system to render the splashes and floats of any object moving through the water. The splashes, the sprays and the floats are generated by the Water interaction VFX. Their generation is computed along with the physics using the same simulated mesh. They scale pretty well to any size of simulated object without changing their properties much. Sea foam bursts The sea foam burst represents the water drops projected by the water hitting a solid surface. Large bursts caused by high speed hits. Spawn The sea foam bursts are spawned per triangle of the simulated mesh when a velocity based trigger is reached. One component of this trigger is the normal relative speed (the speed of the triangle relative to the water projected in triangle normal) This speed can be visualized with the dynamic pressure in the gizmos mode (blue lines).

[PAGE 71] Dynamic pressure (blue lines) is linked to the burst generation. This means the particle generation is bound to the shape of the simulated mesh. Notably a blunt bow will generate more burst than a sharp bow. This is because when moving straight forward in the water, the triangles normal of a blunt bow will be more aligned with the incoming water velocity. It is better to flatten the bow of the simulated hull a bit to emphasize the burst when moving in calm water than to increase its generation trigger, or you may face too much burst generation under special situations. The blunt bow of this vessel makes enough particles burst at moderate speed because triangles face more the incoming water stream. The burst particle generation is also linked to the plunging speed, that is the vertical component of the relative velocity. This helps render the wake wave that is generated when a body is immersed fast in the water. The sum of the normal relative speed and the plunging speed, clamped to positive value, is the trigger and is called the impact speed and defines how strong the collision is. The number of particles generated is currently constant per fixed delta time frame as soon the impact speed exceeds its trigger value. So if you change the fixed delta time you may have to change the number of particles created by frame as well. Lifetime When spawned, the particles are positioned at the triangle center and then their position is scattered around it. They are also outwarded and lowered using the triangle normal and size so they appear in the water and as far as possible to the simulated mesh to avoid seeing them through the hull. Their final velocity is the addition of many velocity :

[PAGE 72] ● The bulldozing speed is the triangle velocity in the triangle normal direction, this simulates the hull pushing the water. ● The tangent flow speed is the water velocity projected in the triangle plane, this simulates the water not being slowed down in the tangential direction. ● The outward speed is the impact speed oriented in the triangle normal and factored by a property. This simulates the water bouncing off the hull. ● The upward projection is the impact speed reoriented and randomized in the vertical axis and a bit in the tangent axis. This simulates the water spilling preferably upward due to the excessive compression of the water underneath. The outward and upward velocities are very important to tweak : increasing the outward speed against the upward speed reduces the chances of having the particles going through the hull. Then the velocity is affected by gravity and a bit of drag with the wind. To try simulating the wind moving around the hull and not through it, the wind is projected on the triangle surface (whose normal is set horizontally to avoid the wind moving up and down). The particles grow as a function of the impact speed to simulate the burst. When growing the alpha clip is modified to make thinner water drops. All along its lifetime, the particles detect the water surface to see if they hit it. When this happens (and always happens with the gravity on, it’s kind of a “while true” loop but the lifetime makes sure they eventually disappear), then the particles die and generate floating particles precisely at the hit location. Rendering During development, the rendering choices for the sea foam burst of the water interaction were based on the breaker's sea foam burst, meaning using stretching textures with many drops drawn on it. While this was necessary for the breakers visual effect to avoid having countless numbers of particles to compute, this choice turned out to be non optimal for the water interaction : excessive overdraw with highly clipped texture, and a hard way to make them collide and clip with geometry, thus making particles seen sometimes through decks. The solution for these problems would be to split the particles to smaller ones with a different texture representing much less drops, thus rendering way more particles but only were required. First tests using this approach were conclusive enough performance wise, still much development is required to make a nice rendering. So a major update is to be expected with the water interaction sea foam burst : more smaller particles instead of large stretching ones. Another issue that could be solved with this new approach is that the texture doesn’t scale well with the size of the object interaction on the water. For a large ship hitting large waves, we would expect some completely atomized water that could be mistaken for sea spray. To offset this issue you can draw your own texture and replace it in the VFX inspector (though it is quite difficult to break the regular shape of the particles). The provided texture, like most of the textures provided, was drawn procedurally using a shader graph and a third party tool to bake the texture in a file.

[PAGE 73] During its lifetime, the alpha clip of the texture varies function of the growth to simulate the drops losing size in the air. You can control this effect using the very sensitive “Burst Pixel Loss Rate” property . Note how the drops shrink in the air.

[PAGE 74] Sea foam floats These particles represent the foam floating on the water after the bursts fall down on the surface. They make a natural and dynamic wake. The wake is naturally done with the burst falling down the surface. Spawn The sea foam floats particles are spawned by the sea foam burst falling down the water surface. The position is precisely the one of the burst even in the waves, this is thanks to the water detection algorithm explained in the physics overview of this document. Yet because there is quite a mismatch between the burst and floats textures (this is to improve the visual quality of the floats), the precision of the burst falling down the water and making floats there is lessened. This might be improved with the planned update of making smaller burst particles though, it would reduce any chance of having particles spawning and disappearing abruptly. The alpha clip used to shrink the particle with time is inherited from the burst alpha clip so as to try to match the foam density. Lifetime After being spawned, the particles can move outward of the hull remembering the normal of the triangles that generated the burst. This helps greatly to simulate the wake wave and make a V shaped wake. The alpha clip is increasing with the age of the particles so they shrink and stay opaque instead of fading out with a basic transparency.

[PAGE 75] A wake made last longer, note the shrink of the floats with time. Beware when increasing the floats lifetime too much, you may exceed the particle system capacity and no more particles will be spawned until some die. Though you can easily change this in the VFX graph, the current capacity has been optimized. Rendering The floats are floating using the same vertex shader as the ocean. This shader is opaque lit with alpha clip but doesn't currently support a normal mapping. The texture provided is procedurally generated and can be changed to another of your choice to match your project style. Because the floats can have a large size, the default 5 vertex quad they use to be rendered is frequently insufficient to accurately follow the ocean waves, leading to some artifacts. To solve this you can change the mesh in the VFX inspector by using one of the subdivided quad provided in the 6-Models folder of the Storm Breakers package. Future updates will permanently solve this issue by using submeshes function of the particle size. Sea sprays Sea sprays particles represent the water being completely atomized by the wind blowing.

[PAGE 76] Some sea spray near the surface. Spawn Sea sprays particles are spawned pretty much the same way than the burst, but also taking in account the local wind. This makes them appear at the same time as the burst when the wind is blowing hard enough. Their number also depends on the product of the local wind per the impact speed as an attempt to increase the spray density when large hits happen under high wind, though this effect still fails to render correctly real sea sprays and will be more developed in the future. Lifetime Like the sea foam burst, the sprays are affected by the wind and gravity but with a larger drag coefficient. The wind is deviated around the hull the same way as the burst particles do so as to prevent the particles going through it. The wind is randomized a bit to scatter the spray particles. It would have made a better rendering to have the particles closely moving above the hull using a fluid simulation of the air, but this is not possible without sacrificing the frame rate that can already fall down in stormy scenes. So currently the sea spray stays close to the surface and we don’t see them much. The lifetime, size, growth and transparency are mostly property driven. Rendering The sea sprays are rendered using a fake lit texture with the alpha looping from 0 to 1 during lifetime. They can be the cause of overdraw. They use the soft particle shader of the VFX graph to simulate their volume when close to an opaque surface. Though this effect doesn’t work on the water because it is drawn in the transparent queue and its depth cannot be accessed because of this.

[PAGE 77] Boat controller visual effects The Boat Controller component included in Storm Breakers works along with its own visual effect that generates 3 kinds of particles : sea foam bursts, sea foam floats and the swirls. The boat controller can generate 3 types of particles : sea foam burst and floats, swirls. Swirls Swirl particles represent the turmoils left by the propeller in the water. Spawn The swirls particles are spawned as a function of the propeller usage at the undeformed position of the controller gameobject by the controller component. This component tries to spawn them at a fixed distance rate when moving so as to have a constant density of this effect no matter the speed (but at high speed the frame rate might not be enough to maintain the fixed distance rate). When the controller is not moving it’s a time rate function of the lifetime that spawns the particles. Then in the visual effect the position is randomized to scatter the particles and remove visible patterns. The transparency is a function of the propeller usage too so as to simulate more intense swirls when the propeller spins.

[PAGE 78] Lifetime Nothing much happens during the lifetime of the swirling particles : their size grows to simulate the swirl spreading, and the transparency diminishes to make the particles fading out before disappearing. Rendering The swirls particles are rendered using the same vertex shader as the ocean. A hand drawn texture is provided and you can replace it with another texture that better fits your project. The default mesh used to render the swirls particle is a 5 vertex quad. When their size exceeds the ocean waves, you may pick another mesh with more poly from the model folder of the Storm Breaker package so they better float with the waves. Sea foam bursts Sea foam burst particles represent the burst of water projected upward caused by the propeller when near the surface. Large sea foam bursts emphasize the power of the boat. The sea foam bursts are spawned at a local position you can set up in the Boat Controller component. The speed they are being given is a function of the propeller usage and also to the depth to simulate the propeller spinning in loose water. The sea foam burst’s lifetime and rendering is similar to the ones of the water interaction. They also leave a sea foam float when falling down the water surface. Sea foam floats Sea foam floats particles represent the foam floating on the surface when the bursts fall down on the surface. They are similar to the ones of the water interaction.

[PAGE 79] Audio overview Storm Breakers package includes all the water and wind audio effects as well as a simple engine sound modulation. Sound power and saturation When a large wave breaks or when a large ship hits the water fast, we expect loud and powerful noise, but this is not exactly possible without turning the speakers very high and lowering the overall volume. Doing so would make ear injury risks with other audio and so this approach has not been chosen. Instead the loudness of some audios were trimmed down by setting a higher pitch than expected. Here is why. Both internally in the audio stream and in the speaker construction, the values generating the noise are bounded. Indeed the audio stream is a series of floats values ranging from -1 to 1, they roughly define the position of the membrane of the speaker as function of the time, and so the membrane vibrates according to the stream of data and produces audio waves in the air. This makes the low frequency need to be lowered to keep within those bounds and so they cannot be powerful enough. If we try to exceed the bounds, the values of the audio stream are clamped to [-1,1], this is called saturation and it doesn’t make more sound. The human ear is quite sensible to saturation, it makes a special kind of noise that is disturbing. So it’s not good to make the audio stream saturates too much. Still, it has been observed that a bit of saturation makes a noise looking more powerful by adding some more high frequencies. You can visualize the audio saturation in the inspector window of the Storm Breakers Camera Controller and you should try to keep it moderate : The red indicates the audio saturating, the 2 bar are for each audio channels (left and right) That being said, it is recommended to turn the speaker high to fully benefit from the audio quality of Storm Breakers : loud breaking wave’s roar, shivering wind and satisfying splashes.

[PAGE 80] Waves audio effect Not only the Storm Breaker’s waves break with an exclusive visual effect, they also make realistic noises. This effect is done with the Breakers Audio component. A single audio source All the procedural audio is encapsulated in one script that feeds one audio stream. This is because in a stormy ocean, there is likely more wave breaking at the same time than there are audio channels in your hardware, which would cause audio preemption when using many gameobjects. How breaking waves are detected The breaking waves are not detected using the particle system (running on the GPU it’s hard to get events from it). The algorithm is actually quite different to the particle system’s grid approach that would lead to too much CPU computation time. It works thanks to the waves being coded as groups. Virtual emitters are coded in C#, they virtually move to keep in the middle of a group. When they reach too far from the camera, they switch to another group within the bounds (this is actually coded in a simpler way using the rhombus grid coordinates). Every frame, these virtual emitters check if the phase in the center of their group and the current group intensity make enough compression for the wave to break. When this happens, they compute their audio volume based on the wave size and the camera distance and orientation, they also compute the pan and pitch. This particular way of detecting the breakers and its difference with the particle system approach can lead to some difference, especially for large waves because they break longer. Yet it allows to keep the forward way of coding that is the backbone of Storm Breakers : no callback delay, only fast forward computation. When a terrain is included in the simulation, the virtual emitters check the depth according to the wave height in the same way the wave height is reduced and the particles triggered. But this measure only concerns the position of the virtual emitter which is in the middle of the group, so there can be a mismatch between the particles and audio generation. At this point it is very hard to perfectly sync both using this approach. How the audio is generated The audio is generated in a OnAudioFilterRead method. It requires an empty audio source to play so it can write custom data on the audio stream. There are no audio clips for this effect, the noise is generated by modulating and filtering a white noise produced by a series of random numbers. This reduce a bit the possibility of increasing the low frequency and reducing the high ones, but it is necessary to prevent the different virtual stream to interfere to with each other (with the same audio clip for several breakers playing simultaneously, the addition of each virtual stream value make a permanent saturation on the final audio stream). So for each virtual emitter, the virtual stream consists of a white noise that receives first a low pass filter to make the noise a bit slow pitched, and another low pass filter to simulate the audio fading off with the distance. Then the volume and pan that have been computed by the virtual emitters in Update are applied to this filtered noise. Finally all the virtual streams are added on the audio stream that is sent to the audio listener.